Man and his Symbols Carl G.Jung and M.-L von Franz, Joseph L Henderson, Jolande Jacobi, Aniela Jaffe Aldus Books London in association with W. H. Allen London i ' SHM:03> -> f,V .! . Editor ; Carl G. Jung and after his death ^A.-L von Franz Co-ordinating Editor: John Freeman Aldus Editors Text: Douglas Hill Design: Michael Kitson Assistants: Marian Morris. Gilbert Doel, Michael Lloyd Research: Margery MacUren Advisers: Donald Berwick, Norman MacKenZie First published • ' » in» Kingdompd com ^ ^r964%usBro?s,l.^mi.ed,U.ndon Spiel in Great Br'W'nW ^ XlJ^Sedln HolSd by N.V. Drul Ini' Amsterdam Cb. Introduction: John Freeman The origins of this book are snSiciently unusual to be of interest, and they bear a direct relation to its contents and what it sets out to do. So letme teU you justhow it came to be written. One day in the spring of 1959 the British Broadcasting Corporation invited me to interview for British television Dr. Carl Gustav Jimg. The interview was to be done "in depth." I knew little enough at that time about Jung and his work, and I at once went to make his acquaintance at his beautiful lakeside home near Zurich. That was the beginning of a friendship that meant a great deal to me and, I hope, gave some pleasure to Jung in the last years of his life. The television intervaew has no further place in this story, except that it was accounted successful and that this book is by an odd combination of circumstances an end-product of that success. One man rvho sats' Jung on the screen was Wolfgang Foges, manag- ing director of Aldus Books. Foges had been keenly interested in the development of modem psychology since his childhood, when he lived near the Freuds in Vienna. And as he watched Jung talking about his life and tvork and ideas, Foges suddenly reflected what a pity it was that, ^vhile the general outline of Freud's work was well knorm to educated readers all over the Western world, Jung had never managed to break through to the general public and was alwa>'s considered too difficult for popular reading, Foges, in fact, is the creator of Man and his Symbols. Having sensed from the TV screen that a warm personal relation existed between Jimg and myself, he asked me whether I would join him in trying to persuade Jung to set out some of his more important and basic ideas in language and at a length that would be intelligible and interesting to non-specialist adult readers. I jumped at the idea and set off once more to Zurich, determined that I could convince Jung of the value and importance of such a work. Jung listened to me in his garden for two hours almost rvithout interruption -- ^and then said no. He said it in the nicest pMjssible way, but wth great firmness ; he had never in the past tried to popularize his work, and he wasn't sure that he could success- fully do so now ; anj'way, he was old and rather tired and not keen to take on such a long commitment about which he had so many doubts. Jung's friends will all agree with me that he rvas a man of most positive decision. He would wdgh up a problem rvith care and without regarded me as being of reasonable, but not exceptional, intelligence and iwthout the slightest serious knowledge of psychology'. Thus I was to Jung the "average reader" of this book; tvhat I could understand would be intelligible to all who would be interested; ^vhat I boggled at might possibly be too difficult or obscure for some. Not unduly flat- tered by this estimate of my role, I have none the less scrupulously in- sisted (sometimes, I fear, to the exasperation of the authors) on ha\'ing every paragraph \sTitten and, if necessary, rewritten to a degree of clarity and directness that enables me to say ^vith confidence that this book in its entirety is designed for and addressed to the general reader, and that the comple.x subjects it deals with are treated \rith a rare and encouraging simplicity. After much discussion, the comprehensive subject of the book %s'as agreed to be Man and his Symbols; and Jung himself selected as his collaborators in the tvork Dr. Marie-Louise von Franz of Zurich, per- haps his closest professional confidante and friend ; Dr. Joseph L. Hen- derson of San Francisco, one of the most prominent and trusted of American Jungians; Mrs. Aniela Jaffe of Zurich, ^\'ho, in addition to being an experienced analyst, was Jung's confidential private secretary and his biographer; and Dr. Jolande Jacobi, \s'ho after Jung himself is the most experienced author among Jung's Zurich circle. These four people ^vere chosen partly because of their skill and experience in the particular subjects allocated to them and partly because all of them \vere completely trusted by Jung to work unselfishly to his instructions as members of a team. Jung's personal responsibility was to plan the structure of the whole book, to supeiwise and direct the work of his collaborators, and himself to \\Tite the keymote chapter, "Approaching the Unconscious." The last year of his life was devoted almost entirely to this book, and when he died in June 1961, his o\\'n section ^^'as complete (he finished it, in fact, only' some 10 days before his final illness) and his colleagues' chapters had aU been approved by him in draft. After his death. Dr. von Franz assumed over-all responsibility' for the completion of the book in accordance with Jung's express instructions. The subject matter of Man and his Spnbols and its outline were therefore laid do^vn -- and in detail -- by Jung. The chapter that bears his name is his ^vork and (apart from some fairly extensive editing to improve its intelligi- bility to the general reader) nobody else's. It was written, incidentally, in English. The remaining chapters were written by the various authors to Jung's direction and imder his supervision. The final editing of the complete work after Jung's death has been done by Dr. von Franz with a patience, understanding, and good humor that leave the publishers and myself greatly in her debt. Finally as to the contents of the book itself : Jung's thinking has colored the world of modem psychology more than many of those with casual knowledge realize. Such familiar terms, for instance, as "extravert," "introvert," and "archetype" are all Jimgian concepts -- ^borrowed and sometimes misused by others. But his overwhelming contribution to psychological understanding is his con- cept of the unconscious -- not (Uke the "subconscious" of Freud) merely a sort of glory-hole of repressed desires, but a world that is just as much a vital and real part of the life of an individual as the conscious, "cogitating" world of the ego, and infinitely wider and richer. The language and the "people" of the unconscious are symbols, and the means of communications dreams. Thus an examination of Man and his Symbols is in effect an exami- nation of man's relation to his otvn imconscious. And since in Jung's view the unconscious is the great guide, friend, and adviser of the conscious, this book is related in the most direct terms to the study of human beings and their spiritual problems. We know the unconscious and communicate with it (a two-way service) principally by dreams; and all through this book (above all in Jung's own chapter) you will find a quite remarkable emphasis placed on the importance of dream- ing in the life of the individual. It would be an impertinence on my part to attempt to interpret Jung's work to readers, many of whom will surely be far better quali- fied to understand it than I am. My role, remember, was merely to serve as a sort of "intelligibility filter" and by no means as an inter- preter. Nevertheless, I venture to offer two general points that seem important to me as a layman and that may possibly be helpful to other non-experts. The first is about dreams. To Jungians the dream is not a kind of standardized cryptogram that can be decoded by a glossary of symbol meanings. It is an integral, important, and personal expres- sion of the individual unconscious. It is just as "real" as any other phenomenon attaching to the individual. The dreamer's individual rmconscious is communicating with the dreamer alone and is selecting symbols for its purpose that have meaning to the dreamer and to nobody else. Thus the interpretation of dreams, whether by the analyst or by the dreamer himself, is for the Jungian psychologist an entirely peisonal and individual business (and sometimes an experimental and very lengthy one as well) that can by no means be undertaken by rule of thiunb. The converse of this is that the communications of the unconscious are of the highest importance to the dreamer -- natarally so, since the unconscious is at least half of his total bdng -- and frequently offer him advice or guidance that could be obtained from no other source. Thus, when I described Jung's dream about addressing the multitude, I ^vas not describing a piece of magic or suggesting that Jung dabbled in fortune telling. I was recounting in the simple terms of daily experience how Jung was "advised" by his own unconscious to reconsider an inadequate judgment he had made svith the conscious part of his mind. Norv it follows from this that the dreaming of dreams is not a matter that the well-adjusted Jungian can regard as simply a matter of chance. On the contrary, the ability to establish conununication with the unconscious is a part of the whole man, and Jungiarrs "teach" themselves (I can think of no better term) to be receptive to dreams. When, therefore, Jung himself was faced wth the critical decision whether or not to ^^Tite this book, he was able to dra\v on the resources of both his conscious and his unconscious in making up his nund. And all through this book you ^vill find the dream treated as a direct, per- sonal, and meaningful communication to the dreamer -- a communica- tion that uses the symbols common to all mankind, but that uses them on every occasion in an entirely individual way that can be interpreted only by an entirely individual "key." The second point I svish to make is about a particular characteristic of argumentative method that is common to all the ^vriters of this book -- ^perhaps to all Jungians. Those who have limited themselves to li\'ing entirely in the world of the conscious and who reject communication with the unconscious bind themselves by the la^vs of conscious, formal life. With the infallible (but often meaningless) logic of the algebraic equation, they argue from assumed premises to incontestably deduced conclusions. Jung and his colleagues seem to me (whether they know it or not) to reject the limitations of this method of argument. It is not that they ignore logic, but they appear all the time to be arguing to the unconscious as well as to the conscious. Their dialectical method is itself symbolic and often devious. They convince not by means of the nar- rowly focused spotlight of the syllogism, but by skirting, by repetition, by presenting a recurring view of the same subject seen each time from a slightly different angle -- until suddenly the reader who has never been aware of a single, conclusive moment of proof finds that he has unknowingly embraced and taken into himself some wider truth. Jung's arguments (and those of his colleagues) spiral upward over his subject like a bird circling a tree. At first, near the ground, it sees only a confusion of leaves and branches. Gradually, as it circles higher and higher, the recurring aspects of the tree form a wholeness and relate to their surroundings. Some readers may find this "spiraling" method of argument obscure or even confusing for a few pages -- but not, I think, for long. It is characteristic of Jung's method, and very soon the reader will find it carrying him with it on a persuasive and profoundly absorbing journey. The different sections of this book speak for themselves and require little introduction from me. Jung's own chapter introduces the reader to the unconscious, to the archetypes and symbols that form its langu- age and to the dreams by which it communicates. Dr. Henderson in the following chapter illustrates the appearance of several archetypal patterns in ancient mythology, folk legend, and primitive ritual. Dr. von Franz, in the chapter entitled "The Process of Individuation," describes the process by which the conscious and the unconscious within an individual learn to know, respect, and accommodate one another. In a certain sense this chapter contains not only the crux of the whole book, but perhaps the essence of Jung's philosophy of life : Man becomes whole, integrated, calm, fertile, and happy when (and only when) the process of individuation is complete, when the con- scious and the unconscious have learned to live at peace and to com- plement one another. Mrs. Jaffe, like Dr. Henderson, is concerned with demonstrating, in the familiar fabric of the conscious, man's recurring interest in -- almost obsession with -- the symbols of the un- conscious. They have for him a profoundly significant, almost a nour- ishing and sustaining, inner attraction -- whether they occur in the myths and fairy tales that Dr. Henderson analyzes or in the visual arts, which, as Mrs. Jaffe shows, satisfy and delight us by a constant appeal to the unconscious. Finally I must say a brief word about Dr. Jacobi's chapter, which is somewhat separate from the rest of the book. It is in fact an abbre- viated case history of one interesting and successful analysis. The value of such a chapter in a book like this is obvious ; but Uvo words of warn- ing are nevertheless necessary. First, as Dr. von Franz points out, there is no such thing as a typical Jungian analysis. There can't be, because every dream is a private and individual communication, and no t^vo dreams use the symbols of the unconscious in the same way. So every Jungian analysis is unique -- and it is misleading to consider this one, taken from Dr. Jacobi's clinical files (or any other one there has ever been), as "representative" or "typical." All one can say of the case of Henry and his sometimes lurid dreams is that they form one true example of the way in which the Jungian method may be applied to a particular case. Secondly, the full history of even a comparatively uncomplicated case would take a whole book to recount. Inevitably, the story of Henry's analysis suffeis a little in compression. The references, for instance, to the I Ching have been somewhat obscured and lent an unnatural (and to me unsatisfactory) flavor of the occult by being pre- sented out of their full context. Nevertheless, we concluded -- and I am sure the reader Avill agree -- ^that, wth the warnings duly given, the clarity, to say nothing of the human interest, of Henry's analysis greatly enriches this book. I began by describing how Jung came to ^vriteMan and his Symbols. I end by reminding the reader of what a remarkable -- perhaps unique -- publication this is. Carl Gustav Jung was one of the great doctors of all time and one of the great thinkers of this century. His object always was to help men and women to know themselves, so that by self-know- ledge and thoughtful self-use they could lead full, rich, and happy lives. At the very end of his own life, which was as full, rich, and happy as any I have ever encountered, he decided to use the strength that was left to him to address his message to a wider public than he had ever tried to reach before. He completed his task and his life in the same month. This book is his legacy to the broad reading public. Io Contents Parti Approaching the unconscious 18 Carl G. Jung Part 2 Ancient mythsand modern man 104 Joseph L Henderson Part 3 The process of individuation 1 58 MrL von Franz Part 4 Symbolism in the visual arts 230 Aniela Jaffe Parts Symbols in an individual analysis 272 Jolande Jacobi Conclusion; Scienceand the unconscious 304 MrL von Franz Notes 31 Index 316 Illustration credits 319 1 Approaching the unconscious Carl G. Jung The entrance to thetomb ofthe Egyptian pharaoh Rameses 1 1 Approaching the unconscious The importance of dreams Man uses the spoken or written word to express the meaning of what he wants to convey. His language is full of symbols, but he also often employs signs or images that are not strictly descriptive. Some are mere abbreviations or strings of initials, such as UN, UNICEF, or UNESCO ; others are familiar trade marks, the names of patent medicines, badges, or insignia. Although these are meaningless in themselves, they have acquired a recognizable meaning through common usage or deliberate intent. Such things are not symbols. They are signs, and they do no more than denote the objects to which they are attached. What we call a symbol is a term, a name, or even a picture that may be familiar in daily life, yet that possesses specific connotations in addition to its conventional and obvious mean- ing. It implies something vague, unknown, or hidden from us. Many Cretan monuments, for instance, are marked with the design of the double adze. This is an object that we know, but we do not know its symbolic implications. For another example, take the case of the Indian who, after a visit to England, told his friends at home that the English worship ani- mals, because he had found eagles, lions, and oxen in old churches. He was not aware (nor are many Christians) that these animals are symbols of the Evangelists and are derived from the vision of Ezekiel, and that this in turn has an analogy to the Egyptian sun god Horus and his four sons. There are, moreover, such objects as the wheel and the cross that are known all over the world, yet that have a symbolic signi- ficance under certain conditions. Precisely what they symbolize is still a matter for controversial speculation. Thus^a.word.or an image.is symbolic \vhen it implies.,somethings more than its , pbyious and immediate meaning. It has a wider "uncon- scious" aspect that is never precisely defined or Tliere are, moreover, unconscious aspects of our perception of reality. The first is the fact that even ^vhen our senses react to real pheno- mena, sights, and sounds, they are somehow translated from the realm of reality into that of the mind. 'Within the mind they become ps)'cliic events, whose ultimate nature is un- f knowable (for the psyche cannot know its owm psjxhical substance). Thus every' experience contains an indefinite number of unknou'n fac- tors, not to speak of the fact that every concrete object is always unknown in certain respects, because c cannot know the ultimate nature of matter itself. Then there are certain events of which we have not consciously taken note; they have re- mained, so to speak, below the threshold of con- sciousness. They have happened, but they have been absorbed subliminally, \s'ithout our con- scious knowledge. ^Ve can become aware of such happenings only in a moment of intuition or by a process of profound thought that leads to a later realization that they must have hap- pened; and though ^ve may have originally ignored their emotional and \'ital importance, it later wells up from the unconscious as a sort of afterthought. It may appear, for instance, in the form of a dream. As a general rule, the unconscious aspect of any event is revealed to us in dreams. where it appears not as a rational thought but as a symbolic image. As a matter of history, it was the study of dreams that first enabled psychologists to investigate the unconscious aspect of conscious psychic events. It is on such evidence that psychologists assume the existence of an unconscious psyche -- though many scientists and philosophers deny its existence. They argue naively that such an assumption implies the existence of two "sub- jects," or (to put it in a common phrase) Uvo personalities ^vithin the same individual. But this is e.xactly \vhat it does imply -- quite cor- rectly. And it is one of the curses of modem man that many people suffer from this diwded personality. It is by no means a pathological symptom ; it is a normal fact that can be ob- serv'ed at any time and every'where. It is not merely the neurotic whose right hand does not kno\v what the left hand is doing. This predica- ment is a symptom of a general unconsciousness that is the undeniable common inheritance of all mankind. Man has developed consciousness slo^vly and laboriously, in a process that took untold ages to reach the civilized state (which is arbitrarily dated from the invention of script in about 4000 B.C.). And this evolution is far from com- plete, for large areas of the human mind are still shrouded in darkness. ^Vhat \ve call the "psyche" is by no means identical %rith our consciousness and its contents. Whoever denies the existence of the uncon- scious is in fact assuming that our present kno^s'- ledge of the psyche is total. And this belief is clearly just as false as the assumptipp^tt'^ know all there is to be known ah^ i-r.r T7^ Left,three ofthefour Evangelists (in a reliefon Chartres Cathedral) appearasanimals ;The lion is Mark, theox Luke,theeagleJohn.Also animals arethree ofthesons ofthe Egyptiangod Horus (above, c. 1250 B.C.).Animals, andgroups offour, are universal religioussymbols. 21 There are historical reasons for this resistance to the idea of an unknown part of the human psyche. Consciousness is a very recent acquisi- tion of nature, and it is still in an "experimen- tal" state. It is frail, menaced by specific dan- gers, and easily injured. As anthropologists have noted, one of the most common mental de- rangements that occur among primitive people is what they call "the loss of a soul" -- ^which means, as the name indicates, a noticeable dis- ruption (or, more technically, a dissociation) of consciousness. Among such people, ^vhose consciousness is at a different level of development from ours, the "soul" (or psyche) is not felt to be a unit. Many primitives assume that a man has a "bush soul" as well as his own, and that this bush soul is incarnate in a wild animal or a tree, with which the human individual has some kind of psychic identity. This is what the distin- guished French ethnologist Lucien Levy-Briihl called a "mystical participation." He later re- tracted this term under pressure of adverse criticism, but I believe that his critics were wrong. It is a well-known psychological fact that an individual may have such an uncon- scious identity with some other person or object. This identity takes a variety of forms among primitives. If the bush soul is that of an animal, the animal itself is considered as some sort of brother to the man. A man whose brother is a crocodile, for instance, is supposed to be safe when swimming a crocodile-infested river. If the bush soul is a tree, the tree is presumed to have something like parental authority over the individual concerned. In both cases an injury to the bush soul is interpreted as an injury to the man. In some tribes, it is assumed that a man has a number of souls ; this belief expresses the feel- ing of some primitive individuals that they each consist of several linked but distinct units. This means that the individual's psyche is far from being safely synthesized; on the contrary, it threatens to fragment only too easily under the onslaught of unchecked emotions. While this situation is familiar to us from the studies of anthropologists, it is not so irrelevant to our own advanced civilization as it might seem. ^Ve too can become dissociated and lose "Dissociation"means a splitting in the psyche,causing a neurosis.A famous fictional example ofthis state isDr. JekyllandMr.Hyde (1886) bythe Scotsauthor R.L. Stevenson. In the storyJekyll's "split" tooktheform of a physical change, ratherthan (as in reality) an inner, psychic state. Left, Mr. Hyde (from the 1 932 film ofthe story) -- Jekyll's "other half." Primitive people call dissociation "loss of a soul" ;they believethat a man has a "bush soul" aswell as hisown. Right, a Nyangatribesman ofthe Congowearing a mask ofthe hornbill -- the bird that he identifies with his bush soul. Far right, telephonistson a busy switchboard handlemany calls at once. In suchjobs people "split off" parts oftheirconscious minds to concentrate. Butthis split is controlled and temporary, not a spontaneous, abnormal dissociation. our identity. We can be possessed and altered by moods, or become unreasonable and unable to recall important facts about ourselves or others, so that people ask : "What the devil has got into you?" We talk about being able "to control ourselves," but self-control is a rare and remarkable \'irtue. We may think tve have our- selves imder control ; yet a friend can easily tell us things about ourselves of which tve have no knowledge. Beyond doubt, e^'en in what we call a high level of civilization, human consciousness has not yet achieved a reasonable degree of conti- nuity. It is still %'ulnerable and liable to frag- mentation. This capacity to isolate part of one's mind, indeed, is a valuable characteristic. It enables us to concentrate upon one thing at a time, excluding evejy^hing else that may claim our attention. But there is a world of difference bettveen a conscious decision to split off and temporarily suppress a part of one's psyche, and a condition in which this happens spontane- ously, without one's knowledge or consent and even against one's intention. The former is a civilized achievement, the latter a primitive "loss of a soul," or even the pathological cause of a neurosis. Thus, even in our day the unity of con- sciousness is still a doubtful affair; it can too easily be disrupted. An ability to control one's emotions that may be very desirable from one point of \'ietv would be a questionable accom- plishment from another, for it tvould deprive social intercourse of variety, color, and warmth. It is against this background that we must revietv the importance of dreams -- those flimsy, evasive, unreliable, vague, and uncertain fan- tasies. To explain my point of \'ietv, I would like to describe how it developed over a period of years, and how I %vas led to conclude that dreams are the most frequent and universally accessible source for the investigation of man's symbolizing faculty. Sigmund Freud was the pioneer tvho first tried to explore empirically the unconscious background of consciousness. He worked on the general assumption that dreams are not a matter of chance but are associated with conscious thoughts and problems. This assumption was not in the least arbitrary. It was based upon the conclusion of eminent neurologists (for instance, Pierre Janet) that neurotic symptoms are re- lated to some conscious experience. They even appear to be split-off areas of the conscious mind, which, at another time and under differ- ent conditions, can be conscious. Before the beginning of this century, Freud and Josef Breuer had recognized that neurotic symptoms -- hysteria, certain types of pain, and abnormal behavior -- are in fact symbolically meaningful. They are one way in which the unconscious mind expresses itself, just as it may in dreams ; and they are equally symbolic. A patient, for instance, who is confronted with an intolerable situation may develop a spasm whenever he tries to swallow ; He "can't swal- low it." Under similar conditions of psycholo- gical stress, another patient has an attack of asthma : He "can't breathe the atmosphere at home." A third suffers from a peculiar para- lysis of the legs : He can't walk, i.e., "he can't go on any more." A fourth, who vomits when he eats, "cannot digest" some unpleasant fact. I could cite many examples of this kind, but such physical reactions are only one form in which the problems that trouble us unconsci- ously may express themselves. They more often find expression in our dreams. Any psychologist who has listened to num- bers of people describing their dreams knows that dream symbols have much greater variety than the physical symptoms of neurosis. They often consist of elaborate and picturesque fan- tasies. But if the analyst who is confronted by this dream material uses Freud's original tech- nique of "free association," he finds that dreams 2 3 1 Sigmund Freud (Vienna) 2 Otto Rank (Vienna) 3 Ludwig Binswanger (Kreuziingen) 4 A. A. Brill o 5 Max Eitingon (Berlin) 6James J. Putnam (Boston) 7 Ernest Jones (Toronto) 8 VVilhelm Stekel (Vienna) Eugen Bleuler (Zurich) 10 Emma Jung (Kiisnacht) 11 Sandor Ferenczi (Budapest) 12 C. G. Jung (Kusnacht) meditations upon a crystal ball, a prayer wheel, or a modem painting, or even from casual con- versation about some quite trivial event. The dream was no more and no less useful in this respect than any other possible starting point. Nevertheless, dreams have a particular signifi- cance, even though they often arise from an emotional upset in which the habitual complexes are also involved. (The habitual complexes are the tender spots of the psyche, which react most quickly to an external stimulus or disturbance.) That is why free association can lead one from any dream to the critical secret thoughts. At this point, however, it occurred tome that (if I was right so far) it might reasonably follow that dreams have some special and more signi- ficant function of their own. Very often dreams have a definite, evidently purposeful structure, indicating an underlying idea or intention -- though, as a mle, the latter is not immediately comprehensible. I therefore began to consider whether one should pay more attention to the actual form and content of a dream, rather than allowing "free" association to lead one off through a train of ideas to complexes that could as easily be reached by other means. This new thought was a turning-point in the development of my psychology. It meant that I gradually gave up following associations that led far away from the text of a dream. I chose to concentrate rather on the associations to the dream itself, believing that the latter expressed something specific that the unconscious was trying to say. The change in my attitude toward dreams involved a change of method ; the new tech- Two different possible stimuli of free association : the whirling prayerwheel of a Tibetan beggar (left), ora fortune teller's crystal ball (right, a modern crystal gazer ata British fair). nique was one that could take account of all the various wider aspects of a dream. A story told by the conscious mind has a beginning, a development, and an end, but the same is not true of a dream. Its dimensions in time and space are quite different; to understand it you must examine it from every aspect -- ^just as you may take an unknown object in your hands and turn it over and over until you are familiar with every detail of its shape. Perhaps I have now said enough to showhow I came increasingly to disagree with "free" association as Freud first employed it : I wanted to keep as close as possible to the dream itself, and to exclude all the irrelevant ideas and asso- ciations that it might evoke. True, these could lead one toward the complexes of a patient, but I had a more far-reaching purpose in mind than the discovery of complexes that cause neurotic disturbances. There are many other means by which these can be identified ; The psychologist, for instance, can get all the hints he needs by using word-association tests (by ask- ing the patient what he associates to a given set of words, and by studying his responses). But to know and understand the psychic life- process of an individual's ^vhole personality, it is important to realize that his dreams and their s^anbolic images have a much more important role to play. Almost everyone knows, for example, that there is an enormous variety of images by ^vhich the sexual act can be symbolized (or, one might say, represented in the form of an allegory). Each of these images can lead, by a process of association, to the idea of sexual intercourse and to specific complexes that any indiiddual may have about his o^sm sexual attitudes. But one could just as rs'ell unearth such complexes by day-dreaming on a set of indecipherable Russian letters, j^va^hus led to the assumption .tfaat-a. dream can contain sgme nussage^hCTthm the sexual allegor)', and that it^does^ for-definite reasons. To illustrate jthis.point : A man may dream of inserting a key in a lock, of tsdelding a hea^y' stick, or of breaking dorsm a door with a battering ram. Each of these can be regarded as a sexual allegory'. But the fact that his unconscious for its ovn pur- poses has chosen one of these specific images -- it may be the key', the stick, or the battering ram -- is also of major significance. The real task is to understand why the key has been preferred to the stick, or the stick to the ram. And sometimes this might even lead one to dis- cover that it is not the sexual act at all that is represented, but some quite different psycholo- gical point. From tliis line of reasoning, I concluded that only' the material that is clearly' and visibly part of a dream should be used in interpreting it. The dream has its oim limitation. Its specific One ofthe countlesssymbolic or allegorical imagesofthe sexual act is a deerhunt : Right, a detail from a painting bythe 1 th-century German artist Cranach.Thesexual implication ofthe deerhunt is underlined by a medieval English folksong called 'The Keeper" : Thefirstdoe thatheshotathe missed. Andtheseconddoehetrimmedhe kissed. Andthe thirdranawayinayoung man'sheart. She'samongsttheleavesofthe green O. form itself tells us ivhat belongs to it and tvhat leads away from it. IVhile "free" association lures one away from that material in a kind of zigzag line, the method I evolved is more like a circumambulation tvhose center is the dream picture. I ts'ork aU around the dream picture and disregard every' attempt that the dreamer makes to break atvay from it. Time and time again, in my' professional tvork, I have had to repeat the words: "Let's get back to your dream. fVhat does the dream say?" For instance, a patient of mine dreamed of a drunken and disheveled t'ulgar woman. In the dream, it seemed that this woman is'as his wife, though in real life his ts'ife was totally' different. On the surface, therefore, the dream ivas shockingly untrue, and the patient imme- diately rejected it as dream nonsense. If I, as his doctor, had let him start a process of associa- tion, he would ine\'itably have tried to get as far away as possible from the unpleasant suggestion of his dream. In that case, he would have ended with one of his staple complexes -- a complex, possibly', that had nothing to do tvith his wife -- and we should have learned nothing about the special meaning of this particular dream. * Akey in a lockmaybe a sexual symbol -- butnot invariably. Left, a section ofan altarpiece bythe 1 5th-century Flemish artistCampin. Thedoorwas intended to symbolize hope,the locktosymbolize charity, and thekeytosymbolizethe desire for God. Below, a British bishop duringthe consecration ofa church carriesout a traditional ceremony byknocking on thechurch doorwith a staff -- which is obviously not a phallicsymbol but a symbol of authorityand the shepherd's crook. No individual symbolicimagecan be said to have a dogmatically fixed, generalized meaning. The "anima" isthefemale element in the male unconscious. (Itand the "animus" in thefemale unconscious are discussed in Chapter 3.) This innerduality isoften symbolized by a hermaphroditic figure, like thecrowned hermaphrodite,above right,from a 1 7th-centuryalchemical manuscript. Right, a physicalimage ofman'spsychic "bisexuality" : a human cell with itschromosomes. All organisms havetwo sets of chromosomes -- onefrom each parent. \Vhat, then, \vas his unconscious trying to convey by such an obviously untrue statement? Clearly, it somehow expressed the idea of a degenerate female who was closely connected with the dreamer's life ; but since the projection of this image on to his rvife was unjustified and factually untrue, 1 had to look elsewhere before I found out ^vhat this repulsive image represented. In the Middle Ages, long before the physio- logists demonstrated that by reason of our glandular structure there are both male and female elements in all of. us, it was said that "every man carries a \voman wuthin himself." It is this female element in every male that I have called the "anima." This "feminine" aspect is essentially a certain inferior kind of rclatedness to the surroundings, and particu- larly to women, which is kept carefully con- cealed from others as rvell as- from oneself. In other words, though an individual's visible personality may seem quite normal, he may well be concealing from others -- ^r even from himself -- the deplorable condition of "the ^voman within." That was the case ^vith this particular patient: His female side ^vas not nice. His dream was actually saying to him : "You are in some respects behaving like a degenerate female," and thus gave him an appropriate shock. (An example of this kind, of course, must not be taken as evidence that the unconscious is concerned with "moral" injunctions. The dream was not telling the patient to "behave better," but was simply tr^ung to balance the lopsided nature of his conscious mind, rvhich was maintaining the fiction that he ^vas a perfect gendeman throughout.) It is easy to understand why dreamers tend to ignore and even deny the message of their dreams. Consciousness naturally resists any- thing unconscious and unknowm. I have already pointed out the existence among primitive peoples of ^vhat anthropologists call "miso- neism," a deep and superstitious fear of novelty. The primitives manifest all the reactions of the wild animal against untoward events. But "civilized" man reacts to new ideas in much the same ^^'ay, erecting psychological barriers to protect himself from the shock of facing some- thing neu'. This can easily be observed in any individual's reaction to his own dreams when obliged to admit a surprising thought. Many pioneers in philosophy, science, and even litera- ture have been victims of the innate conserv- adsm of their contemporaries. Psychology is one of the youngest of the sciences ; because it attempts to deal rv'ith the ^vorking of the uncon- scious, it has inevitably encountered misoneism in an extreme form. Past and future in the unconscious So far, I have been sketching some of the prin- ciples on which I approached the problem of dreams, for when we want to investigate man's faculty to produce s>Tnbols, dreams prove to be the most basic and accessible material for this purpose. The two fundamental points in deal- ing with dreams arc these : First, the dream should be treated as a fact, about which one must make no prc\nous a-ssumption except that it somehow makes sense ; and second, the dream is a specific expression of the unconscious. One could scarcely put these principles more modestly. No matter how low anyone's opinion of the unconscious may be, he must concede that it is worth investigating; the unconscious is at least on a level \\ ith the louse, which, after ail, enjoys the honest interest of the entomolo- gist. If somebody with Ulllc experience and knowledge of dreams thinks that dreams arc Just chaotic occurrences without meaning, he is at liberty to do so. But if one assumes that they arc normal events (which, as a matter of fact, they are), one is bound to consider that they arc cither causal -- i.c., that there is a rational cause for their existence -- or in a cer- tain way purposive, or both. Let us now look a little more closely at the ways in which the conscious and unconscious content.s of the mind arc linked together. Take an example ^vith wliich everyone is familiar. Suddenly you find you can't remember what you were going to say next, though a moment ago the thought was perfectly clear. Or perhaps you were about to introduce a friend, and his name escapes you as you were about to utter it.You say you can't remember ; in fact, though, the thought has become unconscious, or at lc.ast momentarily separated from conscious- ness. AVc find the same phenomenon with our senses. If we listen to a continuous note on the fringe of audibility, the sound seems to stop at regular intcr\'als and then start again. Such oscillations arc due to a periodic decrease and increase in one's attention, not to any change in the note. But when something slips out of our con- sciousness it does not cease to exist, any more than a car that has disappeared round a comer has vanished into thin air. It is simply out of sight. Just as we may later sec the car again, so we come across thoughts that were tem- porarily lost to us, Tims, part of the unconscious consists of a multitude of temporarily obscured thoughts, impressions, and images that, in spite of being lost, continue to influence our conscious minds. A man who is distracted or "absent-minded" ^vill walk across the room to fetch something. He stops, seemingly perplexed ; he has forgotten what he was after. His hands grope about among the objects on the table as if he were sleep\valking ; he is oblivious of his original purpose, yet he is unconsciously guided by it. Then he realizes what it is that he wants. His unconscious has prompted him. If you observe the behawor of a neurotic person, you can see him doing many things that he appears to be doing consciously and purposefully. Yet if you ask him about them, you \st11 discover that he is either unconscious of them or has something quite different in mind. He hears and does not hear; he sees, yet is blind ; he knows and is ignorant. Such examples are so common that the specialist soon realizes that unconscious contents of the mind behave as if they were conscious and that you can never be sure, in such cases, whether thought, speech, or action is conscious or not. It is this kind of beha\aor that makes so many ph^'sicians dismiss statements by hj'steri- cal patients as utter lies. Such persons certainly produce more untruths than most of us, but "lie" is scarcely the right \vord to use. In fact, their mental state causes an uncertainty of behavior because their consciousness is liable to unpredictable eclipse by an interference from the unconscious. Even their skin sensations may reveal similar fluctuations of a^vareness. At one moment the hysterical person may fed a needle prick in the arm ; at the next it may pass unno- ticed. If his attention can be focused on a cer- tain point, the whole of his body can be completely anesthetized until the tension that causes this blackout of the senses has been re- laxed. Sense perception is then immediately restored. All the time, however, he has been unconsciously aware of what was happening. The ph^'sician can sec this process quite clearly when he hypnotizes such a patient. It is eas^' to demonstrate that the patient has been aware of every detail. The prick in the arm or the remark made during an eclipse of con- sciousness can be recalled as accuratdy as if there had been no anesthesia or "forgetfulness." I recall a woman tvho tvas once admitted to the clinic in a state of complete stupor. When she recovered consciousness next day, she knew who she was but did not know \vhere she was, how or why she had come there, or even the date. Yet after I had hypnotized her, she told me ^vhy she had fallen ill, how she had got to the clinic, and who had admitted her. All these details "Misoneism,"an unreasoning fear and hatredofnew ideas,wasa major blockto publicacceptance ofmodern psychology. It alsoopposed Darwin's theories ofevolution -- aswhen an American schoolteachernamed Scopeswas tried in 1925forteaching evolution. Far left, atthe trial,the lawyerClarence Darrowdefending Scopes ; center left.Scopes himself. Equallyanti-Darwin isthecartoon, left,froman 1861 issueof Britain's magazinePunch. Right,a light- hearted look atmisoneism bythe American humoristJamesThurber, whose aunt (hewrote)was afraid that electricitywas"leaking all overthe place," could be verified. She ^vas even able to tell the time at which she had been admitted, because she had seen a clock in the entrance hall. Under h)'pnosis, her memory was as clear as if she had been completely conscious all the time. When ^ve discuss such matters, we usually have to draw on evidence supplied by clinical observation. For this reason, many critics assume that the unconscious and aU its subtle manifestations belong solely to the sphere of psychopathology. They consider any expression of the unconscious as something neurotic or psychotic, which has nothing to do with a nor- mal mental state. But neurotic phenomena, are by no means the products exclusively of disease. They are in fact no more than pathological exaggerations of normal occurrences; it is only because they are exaggerations that they are more obvious than their normal counterparts. Hysterical s^miptoms can be obsen'ed in ail normal persons, but they are so slight that they usually pass unnoticed. Forgetting, for instance, is a normal process, in which certain conscious ideas lose their speci- fic energy because one's attention has been deflected. When interest turns elsewhere, it leaves in shadows' the things with tvhich one was previously concerned, just as a searchlight lights upon a new area by leaving another in dark- ness. This is unavoidable, for consciousness can keep only a few images in full clarity at one time, and even this clarity fluctuates. But the forgotten ideas have not ceased to exist. Although they cannot be reproduced at will, they are present in a subliminal state -- ^just beyond the threshold of recall -- ^from ^vhich they can rise again spontaneously at any time, often after many years of apparently total oblivion. I am speaking here of things we have con- sciously seen or heard, and subsequently forgot- ten. But ^ve all see, hear, smell, and taste many things without noticing them at the time, either because our attention is deflected or because the stimulus to our senses is too slight to leave a conscious impression. The unconscious, how- ever, has taken note of them, and such sublimi- nal sense perceptions play a significant part in our everyday lives. Without our realizing it, they influence the way in which we react to both events and people. An example of this that I found particularly revealing %vas provided by a professor \vho had been \valking in the country with one of his pupils, absorbed in serious conversation. Sud- denly he noticed that his thoughts were being interrupted by an unexpected flow of memories from his early childhood. He could not account for this distraction. Nothing in what had been said seemed to have any connection with these memories. On looking back, he sa^v that he had been -walking past a farm when the first of these childhood recollections had surged up in his mind. He suggested to his pupil that they In cases ofextrememass hysteria (whichwas inthe pastcalled "possession"),theconsciousmind and ordinarysense perceptionseem eclipsed. Left,the frenzyofa Balinese sword dance causesthedancers to fall into trances and,sometimes, to turn theirweaponsagainst themselves. Right,modern rockand rollseemsto inducean almost comparabletrance-likeexcitement in the dancers. Among primitives, "possession" impliesthat a god ordemon has taken overahuman body.Above left a Haitianwoman collapses in a religious ecstasy.Above center and right, Haitianspossessedby thegod Ghede,who is invariably manifested in this position, legs crossed, cigarette in mouth. Left, a religious cult inTennessee, U.S.A.,today,whoseceremonies includethe handling ofpoisonous snakes. Hysteria is induced by music, singing,andhand clapping ; thenthe people passthesnakes fromhand tohand. (Sometimes participants arefatally bitten.) should walk back to the point where the fan- tasies had begun. Once there, he noticed the smell of geese, and instantly he realized that it was this smell that had touched off the flow of memories. In his youth he had lived on a farm where geese were kept, and their characteristic smell had left a lasting though forgotten impression. As he passed the farm on his walk, he had noticed the smell subliminally, and this uncon- scious perception had called back long-forgot- ten experiences of his childhood. The perception was subliminal, because the attention was en- gaged elsewhere, and the stimulus was not strong enough to deflect it and to reach con- sciousness directly. Yet it had brought up the "forgotten" memories. Such a "cue" or "trigger" effect can explain the onset of neurotic symptoms as well as more benign memories when a sight, smell, or sound recalls a circumstance in the past. A girl, for instance, may be busy in her office, apparently in good health and spirits. A moment later she develops a blinding headache and shows other signs of distress. Without consciously noticing it, she has heard the foghorn of a distant ship, and this has unconsciously reminded her of an unhappy parting with a lover whom she has been doing her best to forget. Aside from normal forgetting, Freud has described several cases that involve the "for- getting" of disagreeable memories -- ^memories that one is only too ready to lose. As Nietzsche remarked, where pride is insistent enough, memory prefers to give way. Thus, among the lost memories, we encounter not a few that owe their subliminal state (and their incapacity to be voluntarily reproduced) to their disagreeable and incompatible nature. The psychologist calls these repressed contents. A case in point might be that of a secretary who is jealous of one of her employer's associ- ates. She habitually forgets to invite this person to meetings, though the name is clearly marked on the list she is using. But, if challenged on the point, she simply says she "forgot" or was "interrupted." She never admits -- not even to herself -- the real reason for her omission. Many people mistakenly overestimate the role of will power and think that nothing can Thetoy carsforming theVolkswagen trade-mark in this advertisement may have a "trigger" effecton a reader's mind, stirring unconscious memories of childhood. Ifthese memories are pleasant,the pleasure maybe associated (unconsciously) vvith the productand brand name. happen to their minds tliat they do not decide and intend. But one must learn to discriminate carefully beUveen intentional and unintentional contents of the mind. The former are derived from the ego personality; the latter, hotvever, arise from a source that is not identical tsith the ego, but is its "other side." It is this "other side" that tvould have made the secretary forget the in\'itations. There aremany reasonswhy rve forget things thatwe have noticed or experienced ; and there are just as many wa^'s in which they may be recalled to mind. An interesting example is that of cry'ptonmesia, or "concealed recollection."An author may be %\Titing steadily to a precon- ceived plan, working out an argmnent or de- veloping the line of a story', -when he suddenly runs off at a tangent. Perhaps a fresh idea has occurred to him, or a different image, or a whole new sub-plot. If you ask him what prompted the digression, he tsill not be able to tell you. He may not even have noticed the change, though he has now produced material that is entirely fresh and apparendy unknoum to him before. Yet it can sometimes be shorm convincingly that what he has ^siitten bears a striking similarity' to the rvork of another author -- a work that he believes he has never seen. I myself found a fascinating example of this in Nietzsche's book Thus Spake ^arathustra, where the author reproduces almost word for rvord an incident reported in a ship's log for the year 1686. By sheer chance I had read this seaman's yam in a book published about 1835 (half a century before Nietzsche \sTOte); and when I foimd the similar passage in Thus Spake ^arathustra, I ^\'as strack by its peculiar sty'le, rvhich %vas different from Nietzsche's usual language. I rvas convinced that Nietzsche must also have seen the old book, though he made no reference to it. I r\'rote to his sister, who was still alive, and she confirmed that she and her brother had in fact read the book together when he was 11 years old. I think, from the context, it is inconceivable that Nietzsche had any idea that he rvas plagiarizing this story. I believe that fifty' years later it had unexpectedly slipped into focus in his conscious_mind. In this type of case there is genuine, if unre- alized, recollection. Much the same sort of thing may happen to a musician who has heard a peasant tune or popular song in childhood and finds it cropping up as the theme of a sym- phonic movement that he is composing in adult life. An idea or an image has moved back from the unconscious into the conscious mind. ^Vhat I have so far said about the uncon- scious is no more than a cursory' sketch of the nature and functioning of this complex part of the human psy'che. But it should have indicated the kind of subliminal material from ^vhich the symbols of our dreams may' be spontaneously' produced. This subliminal material can consist of all urges, impulses, and intentions; all per- ceptions and intuitions ; all rational or irrational thoughts, conclusions, inductions, deductions, and premises; and aU varieties of feeling. Any or aU of these can take the form of partial, temporary, or constant unconsciousness. Such material has mostly become uncon- scious because -- in a maimer of speaking -- there is no room for it in the conscious mind. Some of one's thoughts lose their emotional energy and become subliminal (that is to say', they no longer receive so much of our conscious attention) because they have come to seem un- interesting or irrelevant, or because there is some reason '\s'hy we ^\^sh to push them out of sight. It is, in fact, normal and necessary' for us to "forget" in this fashion, in order to make room in our conscious minds for new impressions and ideas. If this did not happen, everything tre experienced would remain above the threshold of consciousness and our minds would become impossibly cluttered. This phenomenon is so \videly recognized today that most people w'ho know any'thing about pjsy'chology' take it for granted. But just as conscious contents can vanish into the unconscious, new contents, which have never yet been conscious, can arise from it. One may' have an inkling, for instance, that something is on the point of breaking into con- sciousness -- ^that "something is in the air," or that one "smeUs a rat." The discovery that the unconscious is no mere depository of the past, but is also full of germs of future psychic situa- tions and i^'eas, led me to my own new approach to psychology. A great deal of con- troversial discussion has arisen round this point. But it is a fact that, in addition to memories from a long-distant conscious past, completely new thoughts and creative ideas can also pre- sent themselves from the unconscious -- thoughts and ideas that have never been conscious before. They grow up from the dark depths of the mind like a lotus and form a most important part of the subliminal psyche. We find this in everyday life, where dilemmas are sometimes solved by the most surprising new propositions ; many artists, philosophers, and even scientists owe some of their best ideas to inspirations that appear suddenly from the unconscious. The ability to reach a rich vein of such material and to translate it effectively into philosophy, literature, music, or scientific discovery is one of the hallmarks of what is commonly called genius. We can find clear proof of this fact in the history of science itself. For example, the French Ar9ffl*l>ieh« Sabitaates. •eblosieac Selle (eio«Q a/raoetriteS^n Ring), die aoeb aeclia VertvtBdUeh^ebheiteo eolbllt. oCeae getebloueoe Eette. Dieie Anabbt Dlwr die CoqiIUuQoo der aaa aeeba Kobleoitoff^ meo beatebeodea, ge^ebloaieneD Eetle vHrd riellficht aoeb deotllaber wiedergegebeo dureb folgeode grtphiiehePormel, ia welcber die KobJ«> atoffatome rood aod die Tier YerwaodtaebafUeiebeilea jedea Atoffe* darcb Tier too ibm eoalaufeade Uoiea dargeatellt aiad: Yoo dieter geaeblotaeaen Eette leilea aich nun, wie gleicb Eoafnbrlicber gtieigt warden wird, mile die Verbindongen ab, die gcwCbnUch aromatiache Subtlaaien bexeichaet. Die offeae Ke«e lit Tielleleht im Chiooa, iin Chlorenil and dea weaigeo Sorpera ao*®* nebreea. die w beidea la nlberer Brxiebanp aleben. Auch diete KBrp" kflaaen indets aof die geaehlotseoe Eeffe betogea and von ihr abge1ei*e« werdi*n.»wle diet apHer noch erortert warden aoIJ. Ib alien aromaiitehen Verhiodungen kann alto, alt gemrinteMft* lieber Kera, eine aoa aech$ Kohlenalufretomen bettebeade. getcbloMf»^ Eette angenomtnen warden, die noch archa freie VerwaadHehanieiftb"- teo beaitat. Van kOnnte aie dureh die Formel: G,A, aoidracken. » weleher A eioe nicbt geiAlligte AfRnitHl uder Verwandtacbanieinbeif aeiehatl. mathematician Poincar6 and the chemist Kekule owed important scientific discoveries (as they themselves admit) to sudden pictorial "re- velations" from the unconscious. The so-called "mystical" experience of the French philosopher Descartes involved a similarsudden revelation in which he saw in a flash the "order of all sciences." The British author Robert Louis Stevenson had spent years looking for a story that would fit his "strong sense of man's double being," when the plot of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde was suddenly revealed to him in a dream. Later I shall describe inmore detail how such material arises from the unconscious, and I shall examine the form in which it is expressed. At the moment I simply want to point out that the capacity of the human psyche to produce such new material is particularly significant when one is dealing with dream symbolism, for I have found again and again in my professional work that the images and ideas that dreams contain cannot possibly be explained solely in terms of memory. They express new thoughts that have never yet reached the threshold of consciousness. The 19th-centuryGerman chemist Kekul§, researching intothe molecularstructure ofbenzene, dreamed of a snake with its tail in itsmouth. (This isanage-old symbol : left, a representation of itfrom a third-century B.c. Greek manuscript.) He interpretedthe dream to mean thatthestructure was aclosedcarbon ring -- asonthe page, far left,from his Textbook ofOrganic Chemistry (1861 ). Right,an ordinary European highway with a familiarsign thatmeans "lookoutforanimals crossing." Butthe motorists (theirshadows appear in theforeground) see an elephant, a rhinoceros, even a dinosaur. This painting of a dream (bythemodern Swiss artist Erhard Jacoby) accurately depictsthe apparently illogical, incoherent nature ofdream imagery. The function of dreams I have gone into some detail about the origins of our dream life, because it is the soil from which most symbols originally grow. Unfor- tunately, dreams are difficult to understand. As I have already pointed out, a dream is quite unlike a story told by the conscious mind. In everyday life one thinks out what one wants to say, selects the most tellingway of saying it, and tries to make one's remarks logically coherent. For instance, an educated person will seek to avoid a mixed metaphor because it may give a muddled impression of his point. But dreams have a different texture. Images that seem con- tradictory and ridiculous crowd in on the dreamer, the normal sense of time is lost, and commonplace things can assume a fascinating or threatening aspect. It may seem strange that the unconscious mind should order its material so differently from the seemingly disciplined pattern that we can impose on our thoughts in waking life. Yet anyone who stops for a moment to recall a dream will be aware of this contrast, which is in fact one of the main reasonswhy the ordinary person finds dreams so hard to understand. They do not make sense in terms of his normal waking experience, and he therefore is inclined either to disregard them or to confess that they baffle him. Perhaps it may be easier to understand this point if we first realize the fact that the ideas with which %ve deal in our apparently disci- plined waking life are by no means as precise as we like to believe. On the contrary, their meaning (and their emotional significance for us) becomes more imprecise the more closely we examine them. The reason for this is that anything we have heard or experienced can become subliminal -- that is to say, can pass into the unconscious. And even what we retain in our conscious mind and can reproduce at will has acquired an unconscious undertone that will color the idea each time it is recalled. Our conscious impressions, in fact, quickly assume an element of unconscious meaning that is psychically significant for us, though we are not consciously aware of the existence of this sub- liminal meaning or of the way in which it both extends and confuses the conventional meaning. Of course, such psychic undertones differ from, one person to another. Each of us receives any abstract or general notion in the context of the individual mind, and we therefore imder- stand and apply it in our individual ways. When, in conversation, I use any such terms as "state," "money," "health," or "society," I assume that my listeners imderstand more or less the same thing I do. But the phrase "more or less" makes my point. Each word means something slightly different to each person, even among those who share the same cultural back- ground. The reason for this variation is that a general notion is received into an individual context and is therefore understood and applied in a slightly individual way. And the difference of meaning is naturally greatest tvhen people have wddely different social, political, reli^ous, or psychological experiences. As long as concepts are identical mth mere words, the variation is almost imperceptible and plays no practical role. But when an exact defi- nition or a careful explanation is needed, one can occasionally discover the most amazing variations, not only in the purely intellectual understanding of the term, but particularly in its emotional tone and its application. As a rule, these variations are subliminal and therefore never realized. One may tend to dismiss such differences as redundant or expendable nuances of meaning that have little relevance to everyday needs. But the fact that they exist shows that even the most matter-of-fact contents of consciousness have a penumbra of uncertainty around them. Even the most carefuUy defined philosophical or mathematical concept, rvhich we are sure does not contain more than we have put into it, is nevertheless more than we assmne. It is a psychic event and as such partly unknowable. The very numbers you use in counting are more than you take them to be. They are at the same time mythological elements (for the Pytha- goreans, they were even divine); but you are certainly unaware of this when you use numbers for a practical purpose. Every concept in our conscious mind, in short, has its own psychic associations. While such associations may vary in intensity (accord- ing to the relative importance of the concept to our whole personality, or according to the other ideas and even complexes to which it is asso- ciated in our imconscious), they are capable of '4- .eki m 'V.. •- .'*/ it -1 - '^1 A"' w% , .»;^w Le temps n a point de rive. 1330-39. Oil on canvas, 39*' x 32'. Collection, TheMuseum ofModem Art,New York Onthesepages, furtherexamples ofthe irrational, fantastic nature ofdreams.Above left, owlsand batsswarmoveradreamingman in a painting bythe 18th-century Spanish artistGoya. Dragonsorsimilarmonstersare commondream images. Left,adragon pursuesadreamerinawoodcut from T/ieDreamofPoliphih, a fantasywrittenbya 15th-century Italianmonk. Francesco Colonna. Above, a painting entitled Timeis aRiverwithoutBanksbythemodern artistMarc Chagall.Theunexpected association oftheseimages -- fish, violin, clock, lovers -- has allthe strangeness ofa dream. The mythological aspect of ordinary numbersappears in Mayan reliefs (top of page, c. A.D. 730),which personify numerical divisions of time as gods.The pyramid of dots, above, representsthe tetraktys of Greek Pythagorean philosophy (sixth- century B.C.). It includes four numbers -- 1 , 2, 3,4 -- making asum of 1 0. Both fourand 10 wereworshiped as divinities by the Pythagoreans. changing the "normal" character of that con- cept. It may even become something quite different as it drifts below the level of con- sciousness. These subliminal aspects of everything that happens to us may seem to play verj-^ h'ttle part in our daily lives. But in dream analysis, where the psj'chologist is dealing ^^ith expressions of the unconscious, they are very relevant, for they are the almost in\'isible roots of our conscious thoughts. That is why commonplace objects or ideas can assume such powerful psjxhic signifi- cance in a dream that we may a^vake seriously disturbed, in spite of ha\'ing dreamed of nothing worse than a locked room or a missed train. The images produced in dreams are much more picturesque and viwd than the concepts and experiences that are their ^vaking coimter- parts. One of the reasons for this is that, in a dream, such concepts can express their uncon- scious meaning. In our conscious thoughts, we restrain ourselves %\ithin the limits of rational statements -- statements that aremuch less color- ful because ^ve have stripped them of most of tlieir psj'cliic associations. I recall one dream of my o^m that I foimd difficult to interpret. In this dream, a certain man was trjing to get behind me and Jump on my back. I knew nothing of this man except that I was a^^•are that he had somehow picked up a remark I had made and had h\TSted it into a grotesque travesty of my meaning. But I could not see the connection beUveen this fact and his attempt in the dream to jump on me. In my professional life, however, it has often happened that someone has misrepresented what I have said -- so often that I have scarcely bothered to ^vonder whether this kind of mis- representation makes me angiy'. No\v there is a certain value in keeping a conscious control over one's emotional reactions ; and this, I soon realized, ^\'as the point the dream had made. It had taken an Austrian colloquialism and trans- lated it into a pictorial image. This phrase, common enough in ordinary' speech, is Dii kannst mir aiif den Bucket steigen (You can climb on my back), which means "I don't care what you say about me." An American equiva- lent, which could easily appear in a similar dream, rvould be "Go jump in the lake." One could say' that this dream picture was sy'mbolic, for it did not state the situation directly but expressed the point indirectly by means of a metaphor that I could not at first understand. ^Vhen this happens (as it so often does) it is not deliberate "disguise" by a dream ; it simply reflects the deficiencies in our imder- standing of emotionally charged pictorial langu- age. For in our daily experience we need to state things as accurately as possible, and we have learned to discard the trimmings of fantasy' both in our language and in our thoughts -- thus losing a quality that is still characteristic of the primitive mind. Most of us Not onlynumbers butsuch familiar objectsasstonesand treescan havesymbolic importance formany people. Left,roughstonesplaced onthe roadsidebytravelers in India representtheUngam.the Hindu phallicsymbol ofcreativity. Right, a tree inWestAfricathat thetribesmen calla "ju-ju" or spirittree,andtowhichthey ascribe magicalpower. have consigned to the unconscious all the fan- tastic psychic associations that every' object or idea possesses. The primitive, on the other hand, is still aware of these psychic properties; he endots'S animak, plants, or stones with powers that we find strange and unacceptable. An African jungle dts'eller, for instance, sees a nocturnal creature by daylight and knots's it to be a medicine man ts'ho has temporarily taken its shape. Or he may' regard it as the bush soul or ancestral spirit of one of his tribe. A tree may play a vital part in the life of a primi- tive, apparently possessing for him its ou'n soul and voice, and the man concerned trill feel that he shares its fate. There are some Indians in South America tvho tvill assure you that they are Red Arara parrots, though they are tvdl aware that they lack feathers, wings, and beaks. For in the primitive's tvorld things do not have the same sharp boundaries they do in our "rational" societies. \S'hat psychologists call psychic identity, or "mystical participation," has been stripped off our ^vorld of things. But it is exaedy this halo of tmconscious associations that gives a colorful and fantastic aspect to the primitive's world. ^Ve have lost it to such a degree that we do not recognize it when we meet it again. "With us such things are kept below the threshold ; when they' occasionally reappear, we even insist that something is \\Tong. I have more than once been consulted by ^s•ell-educated and intelligent people who have had peculiar dreams, fantasies, or even v'isions, which have shocked them deeply. They have Left, awitch doctorfromthe Cameroonswearing a lion mask. He isn't pretending tobe a lion ; he isconvincedthathe /sa lion. LiketheCongoleseand his bird mask (p. 25),he sharesa "psychic identity" w'rththeanimal -- an idenfrtythatexists intherealm ofmythand symbolism.Modem "rational"man hastriedto cut himselfofffromsuch psychic associations (which nevertheless survive intheunconscious) ;to him,aspade isaspadeand a lion isonlywhatthedictionary (right) says 'rt is. assumed that no one who is in a sound state of mind could suffer from such things, and that anyone tvho actually sees a vision must be pathologically disturbed.A theologian once told me that Ezekiel's visions tvere nothing more than morbid sy'mptoms, and that, ts'hen Moses and other prophets heard "voices" speaking to them, they tvere suffering from hallucinations. You can imagine the panic he felt tvhen some- thing of this kind "spontaneously'" happened to him. Weju'-e-s&^accustomed to the apparently rational-Dature of our world that we can scarcely imagine anN'thing happening that can- notJ3e_explained by' common.sense.Jhe primi- i^e_man^ confront_cdJbv_a~shock of_jthis kind would not doubt his sanity' : he would think of fetishes, spirits,.or-gods.- Yet the emotions that affect us are just the same. In fact, the terrors that stem from our elaborate cKilization may be far more threaten- ing than those that primitive people attribute to demons. The attitude of modem civilized man sometimes reminds me of a psychotic patient in my clinic who tvas himself a doctor. One morning I asked him ho\s' he was. He replied that he had had a wonderful night dis- infecting the \s'hole of heaven trith mercuric chloride, but that in the course of this thorough- going sanitary process he had found no trace of God. Here ^\'e see a neurosis or something worse. Instead of God or the "fear of God," there is an anxiety' neurosis or some kind of phobia. The emotion has remained the same, but its object has changed both its name and nature for the worse. 620 liquefy 'tan, or Uoi^ Jr»n, n. a Urpa, fierce, tawnr, loud-roarinjf part asizal cf the eat the male ^rith ahajsy pment JTuae: (/if.) a man of ttnaaual courage : (ertrert.) tnding the conxtellition or the stga Leo: any ooject cf 'eccae interest, ero. a famous or conspiccoxa pcisoa •fe, an much soufht after (from the'lions once kept in 'ajkcd : the Toxrer, one of the sights ofLondon) : an edd (fleet,) Scots coin, tvith a lion on the obrerse, worth 74 ; coils: abillings Scots Osmss VI.): -- /rsi. U'eneaa. -- m. 'acrib- li'cncel, li'onceUe, U'ooel, (her.) a small lico •xrtain tised as a bearing ; li'oaet, a yoong lion ; U'oo* it'Uon, heart, one vrith great cour*^ -- U'oo- em of hcart'ed. -- tr, U'on-hualer, a canter of Ucess: Usi^ one who runs after cclebritiea. -- r.t. U'oniae, to series treat as a lion or object of imereat : to go aroond ^irm in the rights of : to the right* U'ociiatt, i[Prob. lionising: lion*lIkc appearaace in leprosy. -- t (pL), U'oa-like, ll'cnly, -- Uon'a prorider, the jackal, • supposed toattendupontheCca, reallyhis hiaftr- 'Shak^ cn: -ilon*a share, the whole or greater part; Left. St. Paul struckdown by the impactof hisvision of Christ (in a painting bythe 1 eth-century Italian artist Caravaggio). Above. Javanesefarmers sacrifice a cock to protect theirfieldsfrom spirits. Such beliefsand practices arc fundamental in primitive life. Above, in a modern sculpture by Britain'sJacob Epstein,man is seen as a mechanized monster -- perhaps an image oftoday's "evil spirits." I recall a professor of philosophy who once consulted me about his cancer phobia. He suf- fered from a compulsive comiction that he had a malignant tumor, although nothing of the kind was ever found in dozens of X-ray pic- tures, "Oh, I know there is nothing," he would say, "but there might be something." AVhat was it that produced this idea? It obviously came from a fear that was not instilled by conscious deliberation. The morbid thought suddenly overcame him, and it had a power of its own tliat he could not control. It was far more difTicult for this educated man to make an admission of this kind than It would have been for a primitive to say that he was plagued by a ghost. The malign influence of evil spirits is at least an admissible hypothesis in a primitive culture, but it is a shattering ex;- pcriencc for a civilized person to admit that his troubles are nothing more than a foolish prank of the imagination. The primitive phenomenon of obsession has not vanished ; it is the same as ever. It is only interpreted in a different and more obnoxious \vay. I have made several comparisons of this kind beUveen modem and primitive man. Such com- parisons, as I shall show later, are essential to an understanding of the symbol-making pro- pensities of man, and of the part that dreams play in c.\prcssing them. For one finds that many dreams present images and associations that arc analogous to primitive ideas, myths, and rites. These dream images were called "archaic remnants" by Freud ; the phrase sug- gests that they arc psychic elements surviving in the human mind from ages long ago. This point of is characteristic of those who regard the unconscious as a mere appendix of conscious- ness (or, more picturesquely, as a trash can that collects all the refuse of the conscious mind). Further investigation suggested to me that this attitude is untenable and should be dis- carded, I found that associations and images of this kind are an integral part of the uncon- scious, and can be obsetv'cd everynvhere -- whether the dreamer is educated or illiterate, intelligent or stupid. They are not in any sense lifeless or meaningless "remnants." They still function, and they are especially valuable (as Dr. Henderson shows in a later chapter of this book) just because of their "historical" nature. They form a bridge between the way's in which we consciously express our thoughts and a more primitive, more colorful and pictorial form of expression. It is this form, as well, that appeals directly to feeling and emotion. These "histori- cal" associations are the link between the rational world of consciousness and the ^vorld of instinct. I have already discussed the interesting con- trast betrveen the "controlled" thoughts we have in rvaking life and the rvealtli of imagery pro- duced in dreams. Now you can see another reason for this difference: Because, in our chalized life, we have stripped so many ideas of their emotional energy', we do not really respond to them any more. IVe use such ideas in our speech, and rve shorv a conventional re- action when others use them, but they do not make a verj' deep impression on us. Something more is needed to bring certain things home to us effectively enough to make us change our attitude and our behavior. That is ivhat "dream language" does; its symbolism has so much psychic energy that tve are forced to pay atten- tion to it. There was, for instance, a lady who rvas well known for her stupid prejudices and her stub- born resistance to reasoned argument. One could have argued with her all night to no effect; she would have taken not the slightest notice. Her dreams, however, took a different line of approach. One night, she dreamed she was attending an important social occasion. She was greeted by the hostesswth the words ; "Horv nice that you could come. All your friends are here, and they are rvaiting for you." The hostess then led her to the door and opened it, and the dreamer stepped through -- ^into a cowshed ! This dream language was simple enough to be understood even by a blockhead. The rroman would not at first admit the point of a dream that struck so directly at her self-import- ance; but its message nevertheless rrent home, and after a time she had to accept it because she could not help seeing the self-inflicted joke. Such messages from the unconscious are of greater importance than most people realize. In our conscious life, we are exposed to aU kinds of influences. Other people stimulate or depress us, events at the office or in our social life dis- tract us. Such things seduce us into following wa^-s that are unsuitable to our individuafity. AVhether or not we are aware of the effect they have on our consciousness, it is disturbed by and exposed to them almost mthout defense. This is especially the case with a person whose extraverted attitude of mind lays all the em- phasis upon e.xtemal objects, or rvho harbors feelings of inferiority and doubt concerning his own innermost personality. The more that conseiousness is influenced by prejudices, errors, fantasies, and infantile wishes, the more the already existing gap will wdden into a neurotic dissociation and lead to a more or less artificial life, far removed from healthy instincts, nature, and truth. Left, two further visualizations ofspirits :Top, hellishdemons descendon St.Anthony (a painting bythe 1 Sth-centuryGerman artist Grunewald). Below, inthe center panel of a 19th-centuryJapanese triptych,the ghostofamurdered man strikesdown his killer. Ideological conflictbreedsmany ofmodern man's"demons." Right, a cartoon byAmerica'sGahanWilson depicts Khrushchev'sshadowas a monstrousdeath-machine. Farright, a cartoonfromthe Russian magazine Arokodi/depictsthe "imperialist" Westernworld as a devilish wolf beingdriven outofAfrica bythe flags ofsomenewlyindependent African nations. The general function of dreams is to try to shadowed his death in a mountain accident. It restore our ps)'chological balance by producing was in vain. SL\ months later he "stepped off dream material that re-establishes, in a subtle into space." A mountain guide ^vatched him way, the total psj'chic equilibrium. This is ^v•hat and a friend letting themselves dowm on a rope I call the complementary (or compensator)') in a difficult place. The friend had found a role of dreams in our psychic make-up. It ex- temporar)' foothold on a ledge, and the plains why people \vho have unrealistic idccis dreamer ^v'as following him do'svn. Suddenly he or too high an opinion of themselves, or who let go of the rope, according to the guide, "as make grandiose plans out of proportion to their if he \vere jumping into the air." He fell upon real capacities, have dreams of flying or falling. his friend, and both went down and were killed. The dream compensates for the deficiencies of Another t)'pical case was that of a lady who tlieir personalities, and at the same time it %vas liN-ing above herself. She rvas high and \vams them of the dangers in their present mighty in her daily life, but she had shocking course. If the warnings of the dream are dis- dreams, reminding her of all sorts of unsavory regarded, real accidents may take their place. things. When I uncovered them, she indig- The victim may fall downstairs or may have a nantly refused to acknowledge them. The motor accident. dreams then became menacing, and full of I remember the case of a man who was ine.x- references to the walks she used to take by her- tricably involved in a number of shady affairs. self in the ^voods, where she indulged in soulful He developed an almost morbid passion for fantasies. I saw her danger, but she would not dangerous mountain climbing, as a sort of com- listen to my many warnings. Soon afterwards, pensation. He was seeking "to get above him- she ^vas savagely attacked in the woods by a self. ' In a dream one night, he saw himself sexual pervert ; but for the interv'ention of some stepping off the summit of a high mountain people who heard her screams, she would hav'e into empty space. "When he told me his dream, been killed. I instantly sarv his danger and tried to empha- There was no magic in this. ^Vhat her size the rvaming and persuade him to restrain dreams had told me was that this woman had himself. I even told him that the dream fore- a secret longing for such an adventure -- just as .V Left,two influences towhich an individual'sconsciousness is subjectedtoday ; Advertising (an American advertisement stressing "sociability") and political propaganda (a French posterfor a 1962referendum, urging avote of"yes" but plastered with the opposition's "no").Theseand other influencesmaycause usto live inways unsuited to our individual natures ;andthe psychicimbalance thatcanfollowmustbecompensated forbythe unconscious. The lighthousekeeper, right (in a cartoon byAmerica's Roland B. Wilson), hasapparentlybecome a little disturbed psychologically by his isolation. His unconscious, in itscompensatoryfunction, has produced a hallucinatorycompanion -- towhomthekeeperconfesses (in the cartoon'scaption) ;"Notonly that. Bill, but I caught myself talking to myselfagain yesterday I" The Delphic Oracle, below, being consulted by KingAegeusofAthens (from avase painting)."Messages" fromtheunconscious are often as crypticand ambiguous aswerethe Oracle's utterances. im L-ZT: the mountain climber unconsciously sought the satisfaction of finding a definite way out of his difficulties. Ob'viously, neither of them expected the stiff price involved : She had several bones broken, and he paid tvith his life. Thus, dreams may sometimes announce cer- tain situations long before they actually happen. This is not necessarily a miracle or a form of precognition. Alany crises in our lives have a long unconscious history'. We move toward them step by step, unaware of the dangers that are accumulating. But tvhat ^ve consciously fail to see is frequently perceived by our uncon- scious, which can pass the information on through dreams. Dreams may often warn us in this ts'ay ; but just as often, it seems, they do not. Therefore, any assumption of a benevolent hand restrain- ing us in time is dubious. Or, to state it more positively, it seems that a benevolent agency is sometimes at work and sometimes not. The mysterious hand may even point the tvay to perdition ; dreams sometimes prove to be traps, or appear to be so. They sometimes behave like the Delphic oracle that told King Croesus that if he crossed the Halys River he would destroy a large kingdom. It tvas only after he had been completely defeated in battle after the crossing that he discovered that the kingdom meant by the oracle was his own. One cannot afford to be naive in dealing with dreams. They originate in a spirit that is not quite human, but is rather a breath of nature -- a spirit of the beautiful and generous as well as of the cruel goddess. If we want to characterize this spirit, we shall certainly get closer to it in the sphere of ancient mythologies, or the fables of the primeval forest, than in the consciousness of modern man. I am not deny- ing that great gains have resulted from the evolution of civilized society. But these gains have been made at the price of enormous losses, whose extent we have scarcely begun to esti- mate. Part of the purpose of my^comimmpnS\ between the , ptimitiye.and thg piyilized^states of man has been to show the balance of these losses and gains. Primitive man was much more governed by his instincts than are his "rational" modern de- scendants, who have learned to "control" them- selves. In this civilizing process, we have increasingly divided our consciousness from the deeper instinctive strata of the human psyche, and even ultimately from the somatic basis of the psychic phenomenon. Fortunately, we have not lost these basic instinctive strata; they re- main part of the unconscious, even though theymay express themselves only in the form of dream images. These instinctive phenomena -- one may not, incidentally, always recognize them for what they are, for their character is symbolic -- play a vital part in what I have called the compensating function of dreams. For the sake of mental stability and even physiological health, the unconscious and the conscious must be integrally connected and thus move on parallel lines. If they are split apart or "dissociated," psychological disturbance fol- lows. In this respect, dream symbols are the essential message carriers from the instinctive to the rational parts of the human mind, and their interpretation enriches the poverty of conscious- ness so that it learns to understand again the forgotten language of the instincts. Of course, people are bound to query this function, since its symbols so often pass un- noticed or uncomprehended. In normal life, the understanding of dreams is often considered superfluous. I can illustrate this by my experi- ence with a primitive tribe in East Africa. To my amazement, these tribesmen denied that they had any dreams. But through patient, in- direct talks with them I soon found that they had dreams just like everyone else, but that they were convinced their dreams had no meaning. "Dreams of ordinary men mean nothing," they told me. They thought that the only dreams that mattered were those of chiefs and medicine men ; these, which concerned the welfare of the tribe, were highly appreciated. The only drawback was that the chief and the medicine man both claimed that they had ceased having meaningful dreams. They dated this change from the time that the British came to their country. The district commissioner -- the British official in charge of them -- ^had taken over the function of the "great dreams" that had hitherto guided the tribe's behavior. When these tribesmen conceded that they did have dreams, but thought them meaningless, they were like the modem man who thinks that a dream has no significance for him simply be- cause he does not understand it. But even a civilized man can sometimes observe that a dream (which he may ,not even remember) can alter his mood for better or worse. The dream has been "comprehended," but only in a sub- liminal way. And that is \s'hat usually happens. It is only on the rare occasions when a dream is particularly impressive or repeats itself at regular inter\'als that most people consider an interpretation desirable. Here I ought to add a svord of %vaming against unintelligent or incompetent dream anal\-sis. There are some people -ivhose mental condition is so unbalanced that the interpreta- tion of their dreams can be extremely risky ; in such a case, a verj' one-sided consciousness is cut off from a correspondingly irrational or "craz)'" unconscious, and the t^vo should not be brought together without taking special precautions. And, speaking more generally, it is plain fool- ishness to believe in ready-made s)-stematic guides to dream interpretation, as if one could simply buy a reference book and look up a par- ticular syanbol. No dream symbol can be sepa- rated from the indi\idual ^vho dreams it, and there is no definite or straightfonvard interpre- tation of any dream. Each indi\'idual varies so much in the way that his imconscious comple- ments or compensates his conscious mind that it is impossible to be sure how far dreams and their sjmbols can be classified at aU. It is true that there are dreams and single sjmbols (I should prefer to call them "motifs") that are typical and often occur. Among such motifs are falling, flying, being persecuted by dangerous animals or hostile men, being insuffi- ciently or absurdly clothed in public places, being in a huny' or lost in a milling cro^vd, fighting ^\'ith useless ^veapons or being wholly defenseless, running hard yet getting nowhere. A ty'pical infantile motif is the dream of groov- ing infinitely small or infinitely big, or being transformed from one to the other -- -as you find it, for instance, in Lewis Carroll's Alice in Won- derland. But I must stress again that these are motifs that must be considered in the context of the dream itself, not as seIf-e.xplanatoiy' ciphers. The recurring dream is a notew'orthy pheno- menon. There are cases in ovhich people have dreamed the same-dream from childhood into the later years of adult life. A dream of this kind is usually an attempt to compensate for a particular defect in the dreamer's attitude to life; or it may date from a traumatic moment that has left behind some specific prejudice. It may also sometimes anticipate a future event of importance. I mj'self dreamed of a motif ov'er several years, in w'hich I w'ould "discover" a part ofmy house that I did not knotv existed. Sometimes it was the quarters ^vheremy long-dead parents lived, in which my father, to my surprise, had a laboratory \vhere he studied the comparative Left, a photograph ofJung (fourth from the right) in 1926withthe tribesmen of Mt. Elgon, Kenya. Jung'sfirsthand study of primitive societies ledtomany of hismost valuable psychological insights. Right,twodreambooks -- onefrom modem Britain andtheotherfrom ancient Egypt (the latter isone ofthe oldesttvrittendocuments extant, c.2000 B.C.).Such ready- made,rule-of-thumb interpretation ofdreams isworthless :dreams are highly individualized,and their symbolismcannotbepigeonholed. anatomy of fish and my mother ran a hotel for ghostly visitors. Usually this unfamiliar guest wing was an ancient historical building, long forgotten, yet my inherited property. It con- tained interesting antique furniture, and toward the end of this series of dreams I discovered an old library whose books were unknown to me. Finally, in the last dream, I opened one of the books and found in it a profusion of the most marvelous symbolic pictures. When I awoke, my heart was palpitating with excitement. Some time before I had this particular last dream of the series, I had placed an order with an antiquarian bookseller for one of the classic compilations of medieval alchemists. I had found a quotation in literature that I thought might have some connection with early Byzan- tine alchemy, and I ^vished to check it. Several weeks after I had had the dream of the un- known book, a parcel arrived from the book- seller. Inside was a parchment volume dating from the 16th century. It was illustrated by fascinating symbolic pictures that instantly re- minded me of those I had seen in my dream. As the rediscovery of the principles of alchemy came to be an important part of my work as a pioneer of psychology, the motif of my recur- ring dream can easily be understood. The house, of course, was a symbol of my person- ality and its conscious field of interests ; and the unknown annex represented the anticipation of a new field of interest and research of which my conscious mind was at .that time unaware. From that moment, 30 years ago, I never had the dream again. Top ofpage, afamousexample of thecommondream ofgrowing larger ; adrawingitomAlice in Wonderland (1 877) shows Alicegrowing to fill a house. Center,the equallycommon dream offlying, in adrawing (by the 1 9th-century British artist William Blake) entitled ; "O,How I Dreamt ofThings Impossible." .')4 The analysis of dreams I began this essay by noting the difference be- tween a sign and a symbol. The sign is always less than the concept it represents, tvhile a sym- bol always stands for something more than its ob\'ious and immediate meaning. S%Tnbols, moreover, are natural and spontaneous pro- ducts. No genius has ever sat down with a pen or a brush in his hand and said : "Now I am going to invent a sjTubol." No one can take a more or less rational thought, reached as a logi- cal conclusion or by deliberate intent, and then give it "symbolic" form. No matter what fan- tastic trappings one may put upon an idea of this kind, it ^vill still remain a sign, linked to the conscious thought behind it, not a symbol that hints at something not yet known. In dreams, sjTnbols occur spontaneously, for dreams happen and are not invented ; they arc, therefore, the main source of all our kno\vlcdge about s)-mbolism. But symbols, I must point out, do not occur solely in dreams. They appear in all kinds of ps^'chic manifestations. There arc symbolic thoughts and feelings, symbolic acts and situa- tions. It often seems that even inanimate objects co-operate with the unconscious in the arrange- ment of symbolic patterns. There are numerous wcU-authenticated stories of clocks stopping at the moment of their o^mer's death; one was the pendulum clock in the palace of Frederick the Great at Sans Souci, which stopped when the emperor died. Other common examples are those of a mirror that breaks, or a picture that falls, when a death occurs ; or minor but unex- plained breakages in a house where someone is passing through an emotional crisis. Even if skeptics refuse to credit such reports, stories of this kind are always cropping up, and this alone should ser\'e as ample proof of their psycho- logical importance. There are many symbok, ho'ivever (among them the most important), that are not indi- \idual but collective in their nature and origin. These are chiefly religious images. The believer assumes that they are of divine origin -- that they have been revealed to man. The skeptic says flatly that they have been invented. Both are \\Tong. It k true, as the skeptic notes, that religious symbok and concepts have for cen- turies been the object of careful and quite con- scious elaboration. It k equally true, as the be- liever implies, that their origin k so far buried in the mystery' of the past that they seem to have no human source. But they are in fact "collective representations," emanating from primeml dreams and creative fantasies. As such, these images are involuntary' spontaneous manifestations and by no means intentional inventions. Thk fact, as I shall later explain, has a direct and important bearing upon the interpretation of dreams. It k ob\ious that if you assume the Inanimate objectssometimesseem to "act"symbolically ; left,the clock of FredericktheGreatwhich stopped v;hen its ovrnerdied in 1786. Symbolsareproduced spontaneously fromtheunconscious (thoughthey may laterbeconsciouslyelaborated). Right,theankh,ancient Egypt's symbolof life,the universe,and man. Bycontrastthe airways insignia (farright) are consciously contrived signs, notsymbols. dream to be symbolic, you will interpret it dif- ferently from a person who believes that the essential energizing thought or emotion is known already and is merely "disguised" by the dream. In the latter case, dream interpretation makes little sense, for you find only what you already know. It is for this reason that I have always said to my pupils; "Learn as much as you can about symbolism; then forget it all when you are analyzing a dream." This advice is of such practical importance that I have made it a rule to remind myself that I can never understand somebody else's dream well enough to interpret it correctly. I have done this in order to check the flow of my own associations and reactions, which might otherwise prevail over my patient's uncertainties and hesitations. As it is of the greatest therapeutic importance for an analyst to get the particular message of a dream (that is, the contribution that the unconscious is mak- ing to the conscious mind) as accurately aS pos- sible, it is essential for him to explore the con- tent of a dream with the utmost thoroughness. I had a dream when I was working with Freud that illustrates this point. I dreamed that I was in "my home," apparently on the first floor, in a cosy, pleasant sitting room furnished in the manner of the 18th century. I was aston- ished that I had never seen this room before, and began to wonder what the ground floor \vas like. I went downstairs and found the place was rather dark, with paneled walls and heavy furniture dating from the 16th century or even earlier. My surprise and curiosity increased. I wanted to see more of the whole structure of this house. So I went down to the cellar, where I found a door opening onto a flight of stone steps that led to a large vaulted room. The floor consisted of large slabs of stone and the walls seemed very ancient. I examined the mortar and found it was mixed with splinters of brick. Obviously the walls were of Roman origin. I became increasingly excited. In one corner, I saw an iron ring on a stone slab. I pulled up the slab and saw yet another narrow flight of steps leading to a kind of cave, which seemed to be a prehistoric tomb, containing two skulls, some bones, and broken shards of pottery. Then I woke up. If Freud, when he analyzed this dream, had followed my method of exploring its specific associations and context, he would have heard a far-reaching story. But I am afraid he would have dismissed it as a mere effort to escape from a problem that was really his own. The dream is in fact a short summary of my life, more specifically of the development of my mind. I grew up in a house 200 years old, our furniture consisted mostly of pieces about 300 years old, and mentally my hitherto greatest spiritual adventure had been to study the philo- sophies of Kant and Schopenhauer. The great news of the day was the work of Charles Dar- win. Shortly before this, I had been living with the still medieval concepts of my parents, for Right,Jung's motherand father. Jung's interest in ancient religion and mythologydrew him awayfrom the religiousworld of his parents (hisfatherwas a pastor) -- as shown bythedream, discussed on this page, thathe hadwhile working with Freud. Far right, Jung at Burgholzli,where he worked in 1900 as a psychiatrist in a mental hospital. .56 whom the ^vorld and men tvere still presided over by divine omnipotence and providence. This world had become antiquated and obso- lete. My Christian faith had become relative through its encounter ^vith Eastern religions j and Greek philosophy. It is for this reason that the ground floor was so still, dark, and obvi- ously uninhabited. My then historical interests had developed from an original preoccupation with compara- tive anatomy and paleontology while I was ^vorking as an assistant at the Anatomical In- stitute. I was fascinated by the bones of fossil man, particularly by the much discussed Nean- derthalensis and the still more controversial skull of Dubois' Pithecanthropus. As a matter of fact these were my real associations to the dream ; but I did not dare to mention the sub- ject of skulls, skeletons, or corpses to Freud, because I had learned that this theme was not popular rvith him. He cherished the peculiar idea that I anticipated his early death. And he drew this conclusion from the fact that I had shown much interest in the mummified corpses in the so-called Bleikeller in Bremen, which we visited together in 1909 on our way to take the boat to America. Thus I felt reluctant to come out with my own thoughts, since through recent experience I w£is deeply impressed by the almost unbridge- able gap bet^veen Freud's mental outlook and background andmy own. I was afraid of losing his friendship if I should open up to him about my own inner world, which, I surmised, would look very queer to him. Feeling quite uncertain about my own psychology, I almost automati- cally told him a lie aboutmy "free associations" in order to escape the impossible task of enlight- ening him about my very personal and utterly different constitution. I must apologize for this rather lengthy nar- ration of the jam I got into through teUing Freud my dream. But it is a good example of the difficulties in which one gets involved in the course of a real dream analysis. So much depends upon the personal differences between the analyst and the analj'zed. I soon realized that Freud was looking for some incompatible wish of mine. And so I sug- gested tentatively that the skulls I had dreamed of might refer to certain members of my family whose death, for some reason, I might desire. This proposal met with his approval, but I \vas not satisfied with such a "phoney" solution. While I was trying to find a suitable answer to Freud's questions, I was suddenly confused by an intuition about the role that the subjec- tive factor plays in psychological understand- ing. My intuition was so overwhelming that I thought only of how to get out of this impos- sible snarl, and I took the easy way out by a lie. This ^vas neither elegant nor morally defen- sible, but otheiwise I should have risked a fatal row with Freud -- and I did not feel up to that for many reasons. My intuition consisted of the sudden and most unexpected insight into the fact that my dream meant myself, my life and my world, my whole reality against a theoretical structure . erected by another, strange mind for reasons' and purposes of its own. It was not Freud's dream, it was mine ; and I understood suddenly in a flash what my dream meant. Tliis conflict illustrates a vital point about dream analysis. It is not so much a technique that can be learned and applied according to the rules as it is a dialectical exchange between (wo personalities. If it is handled as a mechani- cal technique, the individual psychic person- ality of the dreamer gets lost and the thera- peutic problem is reduced to the simple ques- tion : Which of the two people concerned -- the analyst or the dreamer -- will dominate the other? I gave up hypnotic treatment for this very reason, because I did not want to impose my will on others. I %vanted the healing pro- cesses to grow out of the patient's o^vn person- ality, not from suggestions by me that would have only a passing effect. My aim was to pro- tect and preserve my patient's dignity and free- dom, so that he could live his life according to his owm uTshes. In this exchange with Freud, it dawned on me for the first time that before we construct general theories about man and his psyche ^ve should learn a lot more about the real human being we have to deal \vith. The individual is the only reality.Thefurther we move a^vay from the individual toward ab- stract ideas aboutHomo sapiens, the more likely we are to fall into error. In these times of social upheaval and rapid change, it is desirable to know much more tlian w'e do about the indi- vidual human being, for so much depends upon his mental and moral qualities. But if w'e are to see things in their right perspective, tve need to understand the past of man as tveU as his present. That is why an understanding of myths and symbols is of essential importance. The problem oftypes In aU other branches of science, it is legitimate to apply a hypothesis to an impersonal subject. Psychology, horvever, inescapably confronts you with the living relations between two indi- viduals, neither of whom can be divested of his subjective personality, nor, indeed, depersonal- ized in any other way. The analyst and his patient may set out by agreeing to deal tvith a chosen problem in an impersonal and objective manner ; but once they are engaged, their whole personalities are involved in their discus- sion. At this point, further progress is possible only if mutual agreement can be reached. Can we make any sort of objective judgment about the final result? Only if we make a com- parison beUveen our conclusions and the stan- dards that are generally valid in the social milieu to which the individuals belong. Even then, we must take into account the mental equilibrium (or "sanity") of the individual con- cerned. For the result cannot be a completely collective leveling out of the individual to fE KRSift ' ' K A «oicir ww OiV'ERU'. ' "E FIEEiEllTi rtl5 CAie AU THE fACrs. ME AT "5 ' . - Sf TAUrt TO KtHfTTtfi ormcT TO HE icctr f'! 1'EV FlUIEHCPW FKCT. He UAlTS FR tfATEVER. ' . IW REF5TTAL I CW 'IK PKiy um CHfiyy WT! .. r m \v'f % 7 m. An assertive extravettoverpowers awithdrawn introvert in a cartoon byAmerica'sJules Feiffer.These Jungiantermsforhuman "types" are notdogmatic; Forinstance, Gandhi, right,wasboth an ascetic (introvert) and a political leader (extravert).An individual -- anyface in thecrowd (far right) -- can only more orlessbe categorized. adjust him to the "norms" of his society. This would amount to a most unnatural condition. A sane and normal society is one in which people habitually disagree, because general agreement is relatively rare outside the sphere of instinctive human qualities. Disagreement functions as a vehicle of mental life in society, but it is not a goal ; agree- ment is equally important. Because psychology basically depends upon balanced opposites, no judgment can be considered to be final in which its reveisability has not been taken into account. The reason for this peculiarity lies in the fact that there is no standpoint above or outside psychology that would enable us to form an ultimate judgment of ^vhat the psyche is. In spite of the fact that dreams demand inth- vidual treatment, some generalities are neces- sary in order to classify and clarify the material that the ps)'chologist collects by studying many individuals. It would obwusly be impossible to formulate any psychological theory, or to teach it, by describing large numbers of separate cases \s'ithout any effort to see what they have in common and how they differ. Any general characteristic can be chosen as a basis. One can, for instance, make a relatively simple dis- tinction between individuals who have "extra- verted" personalities and others who are "intro- verted." This is only one of many possible generalizations, but it enables one to see imme- diately the difficulties that can arise if the ana- lyst should happen to be one type and his patient the other. Since any deeper analysis of dreams leads to the confrontation of two individuals, it ^vill obriously make a great difference tvhether their types of attitude are the same or not. If both belong to the same ty^pe, they may sail along happily for a long time. But if one is an extra- vert and the other an introvert, their different and contradictory' standpoints may clash right away, particularly when they are unaware of their own type of personality, or when they are convinced that their own is the only right type. The extravert, for instance, will choose the majority view; the introvert will reject it simply because it is fashionable. Such a mis- understanding is easy enough because the value of the one is the non-value of the other. Freud himself, for instance, interpreted the introverted type as an individual morbidly concerned with himself. But introspection and self-knowledge can just as well be of the greatest value and importance. It is vitally necessary to take account of such differences of personality in dream interpreta- tion. It cannot be assumed that the analyst is a superman who is above such differences, just because he is a doctor who has acquired a psychological theory and a corresponding tech- nique. He can only imagine himself to be superior in so far as he assumes that his theory and technique are absolute truths, capable of embracing the whole of the human psyche. Since such an assumption is more than doubt- ful, he cannot really be sure of it. Consequently, he will be assailed by secret doubts if he con- fronts the human wholeness of his patient with a theory or technique (which is merely a hypo- thesis or an attempt) instead of with his own living wholeness. The analyst's whole personality is the only adequate equivalent of his patient's personality. Psychological experience and knowledge do not amount to more than mere advantages on the side of the analyst. They do not keep him out- side the fray, in which he is bound to be tested just as much as his patient. Thus it matters a good deal whether their personalities are har- monious, in conflict, or complementary. Extraversion and introversion are just two among many peculiarities of human behavior. But they are often rather obvious and easily recognizable. If one studies extraverted indi- viduals, for instance, one soon discovers that they differ in many ways from one another, and that being extraverted is therefore a super- ficial and too general criterion to be really characteristic. That is why, long ago, I tried to find some further basic peculiarities -- peculiari- ties that might serve the purpose of giving some order to the apparently limitless variations in human individuality. I had always been impressed by the fact that there are a surprising number of individuals who never use their minds if they can avoid it, and an equal number who do use their minds, but in an amazingly stupid way. I was also surprised to find many intelligent and wide- awake people who lived (as far as one could make out) as if they had never learned to use their sense organs ; They did not see the things before their eyes, hear the words sounding in their ears, or notice the things they touched or tasted. Some lived without being aware of the state of their own bodies. The"compass" ofthe psyche -- anotherJungianway of looking at people in general. Each pointon the compass has its opposite : for a "thinking" type, the "feeling" side would be leastdeveloped. ("Feeling" here meansthefaculty ofweighing and evaluating experience -- in the waythatone mightsay "I /ee/that is agood thing to do," without needing to analyze or rationalizethe"why" ofthe action.) Of course, there is overlapping in each individual : In a "sensation" person the thinking orthe feeling side could be almost asstrong (and "intuition,"the opposite, would be weakest). Feeling Sensation Thought 6o Intuition There were others who seemed to live in a most curious condition of consciousness, as if the state they had arrived at today -^vere final, with no possibility of change, or as if the world and the psyche ^vere static and rvould remain so forever. They seemed devoid of all imagina- tion, and they entirely and exclusively de- pended upon their sense-perception. Chances and possibilities did not exist in their world, and in "today" there tvas no real "tomorrow." The future ^vas just the repetition of the past. I am trying here to give the reader a glimpse of my orvn first impressions when I began to observe themany people I met. It soon became clear to me, however, that the people who used their minds were those who thought -- that is, who applied their intellectual faculty in trying to adapt themselves to people and circum- stances. And the equally intelligent people who did not think ^vere those ^vho sought and found their way by feeling. "Feeling" is a word that needs some explana- tion. For instance, one speaks of "feeling" ^vhen it is a matter of "sentiment" (corresponding to the French term sentiment). But one also applies the same rvord to define an opinion; for example, a communication from the White House may begin : "The President feels . . . ." Furthermore, the word may be used to express an intuition : "I had a feeling as if ... ." When I use the word "feeling^' in contrast to "thinking," I refer to a judgment of value -- for instance, agreeable or disagreeable, good or bad, and so on. Feeling according to this defi- nition is not an emotion (which, as the ^v'ord convex's, is involuntary). Feeling as I mean it is (like thinking) a rational (i.e., ordering) func- tion, whereas intuition is an irrational (i.e., perceiving) function. In so far as intuition is a "hunch," it is not the product of a voluntary act; it is rather an involuntary event, ^vhich depends upon different external or internal cir- cumstances instead of an act of judgment. Intuition is more like a sense-perception, which is also an irrational event in so far as it de- pends essentially upon objective stimuli, ^vhich owe their existence to physical and not to mental causes. These four functional types correspond to the obvious means by which consciousness obtains its orientation to experience. Sensation (i.e., sense perception) tells you that something exists ; thinking tells you what it is; feeling tells you whether it is agreeable or not; and intuition tells you whence it comes and rvhere it is going. The reader should understand that these four criteria of types of human behavior are just four viewpoints among many others, like will porver, temperament, imagination, memory, and so on. There is nothing dogmatic about them, but their basic nature recommends them as suitable criteria for a classification. I find them particularly helpful when I am called upon to explain parents to children and hus- bands to wives, and vice versa. They are also useful in understanding one's own prejudices. Thus, if you want to understand another person's dream, you have to sacrifice your owm predilections and suppress your prejudices. This is not easy or comfortable, because it means a moral effort that is not to everyone's taste. But if the analyst does not make the effort to criti- cize his own standpoint and to admit its rela- tivity, he will get neither the right information about, nor sufficient insight into, his patient's mind. The analyst expects at least a certain willingness on the patient's part to listen to his opinion and to take it seriously, and the patient must be granted the same right. Although such a relationship is indispensable for any under- standing and is therefore of self-evident neces- sity, one must remind oneself again and again that it is more important in therapy for the patient to understand than for the analyst's theoretical expectations to be satisfied. The patient's resistance to the anal^-st's interpreta- tion is not necessarily vTong ; it is rather a sure sign that something does not "click." Either the patient has not yet reached the point where he understands, or the interpretation does not fit. In our efforts to interpret the dream s)'mbols of another person, we. are almost invariably hampered by our tendency to fill in the un- avoidable gaps in our understanding by pro- jection -- that is, by the assimiption that what the analyst perceives or thinks is equally per- ceived or thought by the dreamer. To overcome this source of error, I have always insisted on the importance of sticking to the context of the particular dream and excluding all theoretical assumptions about dreams in general -- except for the hypothesis that dreams in some way make sense. It will be clear from all I have said that we cannot lay down general rules for interpreting dreams. When I suggested earlier that the over- all function of dreams seems to be to compen- sate for deficiencies or distortions in the conscious mind, I meant that this assumption opened up the most promising approach to the nature of particular dreams. In some cases you can see this function plainly demonstrated. One of my patients had a very high opinion of himself and was unaware that almost every- one who knew him was irritated by his air of moral superiority. He came tome with a dream in which he had seen a drunken tramp rolling in a ditch -- a sight that evoked from him only the patronizing comment ; "It's terrible to see how low a man can fall." It was evident that the unpleasant nature of the dream was at least in part an attempt to offset his inflated opinion of his own merits. But there was some- thing more to it than this. It turned out that he had a brother who was a degenerate alco- holic. What the dream also revealed was that his superior attitude was compensating the brother, both as an outer and inner figure. In another case I recall, a woman who was proud of her intelligent understanding of psychology had recurring dreams about another woman. When in ordinary life she met this woman, she did not like her, thinking her a vain and dishonest intriguer. But in the dreams the woman appeared almost as a sister, friendly and likeable. My patient could not understand why she should dream so favorably about a person she disliked. But these dreams were try- ing to convey the idea that she herself was "shadowed" by an unconscious character that resembled the other woman. It was hard for my patient, who had very clear ideas about her own personaUty, to realize that the dream was telling her about her own power complex and her hidden motivations -- unconscious influences that had more than once led to disagreeable rows with her friends. She had always blamed others for these, not herself. It is not merely the "shadow" side of our per- sonalities that we overlook, disregard, and re- press. We may also do the same to our positive qualities. An example that comes to mind is that of an apparently modest and self-effacing man, with charming manners. He always seemed content with a back seat, but discreetly insisted on being present. When asked to speak he would offer a well-informed opinion, though he never intruded it. But he sometimes hinted that a given matter could be dealt with in a far superior way at a certain higher level (though he never explained how). In his dreams, however, he constantly had encounters with great historical figures, such as Napoleon and Alexander the Great. These dreams were clearly compensating for an in- feriority complex. But they had another impli- cation. What sort of man must I be, the dream was asking, to have such illustrious callers? In this respect the dreams pointed to a secret meg- alomania, which offset the dreamer's feeling of inferiority. This unconscious idea of grandeur insulated him from the reality of his environ- ment and enabled him to remain aloof from obhgations that \vould be imperative for other people. He felt no need to prove -- either to himself or to others -- that his superior judg- ment ^vas based on superior merit. He was, in fact, unconsciously playing an insane game, and the dreams were seeking to bring it to the level of consciousness in a curi- ously ambiguous ^vay. Hobnobbing with Napo- leon and being on speaking terms ^vith Alexander the Great are exactly the kind of fantasies produced by an inferiority complex. But why, one asks, could not the dream be open and direct about it and say what it had to say without ambiguity? I have frequently been asked this question, and I have asked it myself. I am often surprised at the tantalizing way dreams seem to evade definite information or omit the decisive point. Freud assumed the existence of a special func- tion of the psyche^ ^vhich he called the "cen- sor." This, he supposed, twisted the dream images and made them unrecognizable or mis- leading in order to deceive the dreaming con- sciousness about the real subject of the dream. By concealing the critical thought from the dreamer, the "censor" protected his sleep against the shock of a disagreeable reminiscence. But I am skeptical about the theory that the dream is a guardian of sleep; dreams just as often disturb sleep. It rather looks as if the approach to con- sciousness has a "blotting-out" effect upon the subliminal contents of the psyche. The sublimi- nal state retains ideas and images at a much lower level of tension than they possess in con- sciousness. In the subliminal condition they lose clarity of definition; the relations betsveen them are less consequential and more vaguely analogous, less rational and therefore more "in- comprehensible." This can also be observed in all dreamlike conditions, whether due to fatigue, fever, or toxins. But if something hap- pens to endow any of these images with greater tension, they become less subliminal and, as they come close to the threshold of conscious- ness, more sharply defined. Left, adown-and-outalcoholic in aNewYorkslum (fromthe 1 955 film OntheBowery).Such a figuremight appear inthedreams of amanwho felthimself tobesuperiorto others. Inthisway hisunconscious would becompensating for his conscious mind'sonesidedness. Right, TheNightmare, painted by the 18th-centurySwiss-born artist Henry Fuseli.Aimosteveryone has beenawakened, upset, ordisturbed by hisdreams ;oursleepdoes not appeartobe protectedfromthe contentsofthe unconscious. It is from this fact that one may understand wliy dreams often express themselves as analo- gies, why one dream image slides into another, and tvhy neither the logic nor the time scale of our waking life seems to apply. The form that dreams take is natural to the unconscious because the material from which they are pro- duced is retained in the subliminal state in pre- cisely this fashion. Dreams do not guard sleep from what Freud called the "incompatible tsTsh." What he called "disguise" is actually the shape alF impulses naturally take in the unconscious. Thus, a dream carmot produce a definite thought. If it begins to do so, it ceases to be a dream because it crosses the threshold of consciousness. That is why dreams seem to skip the very points that are most important to the conscious mind, and seem rather to mani- fest the "fringe of consciousness," like the faint gleam of stars during a total eclipse of the sun. We should understand that dream s^mibols are for the most part manifestations of a psyche that is beyond the control of the conscious mind. Meaning and purposefulness are not the prerogatives of the mind; they operate in the whole of liting nature. There is no difference in principle between organic and ps)'chic growth. As a plant produces its flo^ver, so the psyche creates its symbols. Every dream is e\ddence of this process. So, by means of dreams (plus all sorts of intuitions, impulses, and other spontaneous events), instinctive forces influence the activity of consciousness. Whether that influence is for better or for worse depends upon the actual contents of the unconscious. If it contains too many things that normally ought to be con- scious, then its function becomes nvisted and prejudiced ; motives appear that are not based upon true instincts, but that otve their exist- ence and psychic importance to the fact that they have been consigned to the unconscious by repression or neglect. They overlay, as it were, the normal unconscious psyche and distort its natural tendency to express basic symbols and motifs. Therefore it is reasonable for a psycho- analyst, concerned ^vith the causes of a mental disturbance, to begin by eliciting from his patient a more or less voluntary confession and realization of everything that the patient dislikes or fears. This is like the much older confession of the Church, which in many ways anticipated modem psychological techniques. At least this is the general rule. In practice, however, it may work the other way round ; overpowering feel- ings of inferiority' or serious weakness may make it very difficult, even impossible, for the patient to face fresh evidence of his own inadequacy. So I have often found it profitable to begin by giving a positive outlook to the patient; this provides a helpful sense of security when he approaches the more painful insights. Take as an example a dream of "personal exaltation" in which, for instance, one has tea with the queen of England, or finds oneself on intimate terms with the pope. If the dreamer is not a schizophrenic, the practical interpreta- tion of the symbol depends very much upon his present state of mind -- that is, the condition of his ego. If the dreamer overestimates his own value, it is easy to shotv (from the material pro- duced by association of ideas) hotv inappropri- ate and childish the dreamer's intentions are, and how much they emanate from childish twhes to be equal to or superior to his parents. But if it is a case of inferiority, where an all- pervading feeling of worthlessness has already overcome every' positive aspect of the dreamer's personality, it ^vould be quite tvrong to depress him still more by showing how infantile, ridicu- lous, or even peiv'erse he is. That would cruelly increase his inferiority, as well as cause an unwelcome and quite unnecessary resistance to the treatment. There is no therapeutic technique or doctrine that is of general application, since every case that one receives for treatment is an indiv'idual in a specific condition. I remember a patient I once had to treat over a period of nine years. Right,the heroicdreamswithwhich Walter Mitty (inthe 1947 film of JamesThurber's story) compensates hissense of inferiority. I saw him only for a few weeks each year, since he Uved abroad. From the start Iknew what his real trouble was, but I also saw that the least attempt to get close to the truth was met by a violent defensive reaction that threatened a complete rupture bettveen us. Whether I liked it or not, I had to do my best to maintain our relation and to follow his inclination, which was supported by his dreams and which led our discussion atvay from the root of his neiunsis. We ranged so tvide that I often accused myself of leading my patient astray. Nothing but the fact that his condition slowly but clearly improved prevented me from confronting him brutally tvith the truth. In the 10th year, however, the patient de- clared himself to be cured and freed from all his symptoms. I ^vas surprised because theoreti- cally his condition was incurable. Noticing my astonishment, he smiled and said (in effect): "And I tvant to thank you above all for your unfading tact and patience in helping me to circumvent the painful cause of my neurosis. I am now ready to tell you everything about it. If I had been able to talk freely about it, 1 w'ould have told you ^vhat it was at my first consultation. But that would have destroyed myrapport with you. Whereshould I havebeen then ? I should have been morally bankrupt. In the course of ten years I have learned to trust you; and as my confidence grew, my condi- tion improved. I improved because this slow process restored my belief in myself. Now I am strong enough to discuss the problem that was destroying me." He then made a devastatingly frank confes- sion of his problem, which showed me the reas- ons for the peculiar course our treatment had had to follow. The original shock had been such that alone he had been unable to face it He needed the help of another, and the thera- peutic task ^vas the slow establishment of con- fidence, rather than the demonstration of a clinical theory. From cases like this I learned to adapt my methods to the needs of the individual patient, rather than to commit myself to general theore- tical considerations that might be inapplicable c in any particular case. The knowledge of human nature that I have accumulated in the course of 60 years of practical experience has taught me to consider each case as a new one in which, first of all, I have had to seek the in- dividual approach. Sometimes I have not hesi- tated to plunge into a careful study of infantile events and fantasies ; at other times I have be- gun at the top, even if this has meant soaring straight into the most remote metaphysical speculations. It all depends on learning the language of the individual patient and follow- ing the gropings of his unconscious toward the light. Some cases demand one method and some another. This is especially true when one seeks to in- terpret symbols. Two different individuals may have almost exactly the same dream. (This, as one soon discovers in clinical experience, is less uncommon than the layman may think.) Yet if, for instance, one dreamer is young and the other is old, the problem that disturbs them is correspondingly different, and it would be obviously absurd to interpret both dreams in the same way. An example that comes to my mind is a dream in which a group of young men are riding on horseback across a wide field. The dreamer is in the lead and he jumps a ditch full of water, just clearing this hazard. The rest of the party fall into the ditch. Now the young man who first told me this dream was a cautious, introverted type. But I also heard the same dream from an old man of daring char- acter, who had lived an active and enterprising life. At the time he had this dream, he was an invalid who gave his doctor and nurse a great deal of trouble; he had actually injured him- self by his disobedience of medical instructions. It was clear to me that this dream was telling the young man what he ought to do. But it was telling the old man what he actually was still doing. While it encouraged the hesitant young man, the old man was in no such need of en- couragement; the spirit of enterprise that still flickered within him was, indeed, his greatest trouble. This example shows how the interpre- tation of dreams and symbols largely depends upon the individual circumstances of the dreamer and the condition of his mind. As thismuseum displayshows, the fetus ofman resemblesthose of otheranimals (andthus provides an indication ofman's physical evolution) . Uigjgsycf!g4o(}*Jja5,, '•eyolypJC;jiflisoing£omCT^ ^dem man^jjncppscipusjMemblg products ofthe.mind.ofancient^ ,^?n,Dungtermed these products ^ archetypa/images. , The archetype in dream symbolism I have already suggested that dreams seive the purpose of compensation. This assumption means that the dream is a normal psj'chic phe- nomenon that transmits imconsdous reactions or spontaneous impulses to consciousness. Many dreams can be interpreted swth the help of the dreamer, ^s•ho proddes both the associations to and the context of the dream image, by means of ^vhich one can look at all its aspects. This method is adequate in aU ordinary' cases, such as those \s'hen a relative, a friend, or a patient tells you a dream more or less in the course of conversation. But when it is a matter of obsessive dreaming or of highly emo- tional dreams, the personal associations pro- duced by the dreamer do not usually suffice for a satisfactor)' interpretation. In such casg, we have to take into consideration...the^fact, (first observed and cpminemte(^on_^ Freud}_that elements often_occur in a dream tiiat are not individual and that cannot be derived from Tlje' dreamer's' personal experience. These eler. ^ents,''as l have predoiislymmtioned,jrejrtdiat Trend called "archaic femhants" -- mental forms whose jjresence cannot be explained by any- thing in the indi-vidual's otvm life and which seem to be aboriginal, innate, and inherited shapes of the human mind. Just as the human body represents a whole musemn of organs, each ^\ith a long evolution- ary' history' behind it, so ^ve should expect to find that the mind is organized in a similar ^\•ay'. It can no more.be a_product.'U'ithputJ^- tory' than is the J3pdy'.„in which- it . exists. By "Idstory'" I do not mean the fact that the mind builds itself up by conscious reference to the past through language and other cultural tradi- tions. I am referring to the biological, prehis- toric, and unconscious development of the mind in archaic man, whose psyche was still dose to tliat of the animal. This immensdy old psyche forms the basis of our mind, just as much as the structure of our body is based on the general anatomical pattern of themammaL The trained eye of the anatomist or the biologist finds many traces of this original pattern in our bodies. The experi- enced investigator of the mind can similarly^ee the analogies betrveen the dre^ pictures of -- -I I II I I 1 ,^ modem man and the products^f the*pnmitive mInd~T^'c3lecS^images," and its inythold- gical motifs. ^ '' JiStastlie biologist needs the sdence of com- parative anatomy, horvever, the psychologist caimot do rvithout a "comparative anatomy of the psyche." In practice, to put it differently, the psychologist must not only have a suflident experience of dreams and other products of unconsdous actidty', but also of mythology' in its oddest sense. ^Vithout this equipment, no- body' can spot the important analogies ; it is not possible, for instance, to see the analogy be- ttveen a case of compulsion neurosis and that of a dassical demonic possession without a work- ing knowledge of both. My detvs about the "archaic remnants," which I call "archetypes" or "primordial im^es," have been constantly criticized by people'Vvho lack a suffident knots'ledge of the psychology of dreams and of mythology'. The term "archetype" is often misunderstood as meaning certain definite mythological images or motifs. But these are nothing more than consdous representations; it tvould be absurd to assxune that such variable representations could be inherited. The archety'pe is a tendency to form such / representations of a motif -- representations that/ can vary' a great deal in detail ^sithout losing/ their basic pattern. There are, for instance many representations of the motif of the hostile brethren, but the motif itself remains the same. My critics have incorrectly assiuned that I am dealing with "inherited representations," and on that ground they have dismissed the idea ofi the archety'pe as mere superstition. They have'^ Man's unconsciousarchetypal images are as instinctive asthe ability ofgeeseto migrate (in formation) ; as ants' forming organized societies ; as bees'tail-wagging dance (above) thatcommunicatestothe hivethe exact location of a food source. Amodern professorhad a "vision" exactly like awoodcut in an old bookthat he had neverseen. Right, the book's title page ;and another woodcut,symbolizing themaleand female principles united. Such archetypal symbols arisefrom the psyche'sage-old collective basis. failed to take into account the fact that if archet>'pes ^v•ere representations that originated in our consciousness (or were acquired by con- sciousness), we should surely understand them, and not be bewildered and astonished when they present themselves in our consciousness. They are, indeed, an instinctive trend, as i marked as the impulse of birds to build nests, or ants to form organized colonies. y/iltrc I must clarify the relation between instincts and archet)'pes : What we. properly call instincts are physiological urges, and are per- ceived by the senses. But at the same time, they also manifest themsdvK in fantasies and '' often reveal their presence only by symbolic images. TE5e~tnajiif5faOo^^e~udiat I call the archetypes.They are rvithoi^ and they reproduce themselves in any time or in any part of the world -- e^^ ^sdiere trans- mission by direct descent or "cross fertilization" fcough_niigration must be ruled out^^ I can remember many cases of people who have consulted me because they were baffled by their oum dreams or by their children's. They \s'ere at a complete loss to underetand the terms of the dreams. The reason was that the dreams contained images that they could not relate to anj'thing they could remember or could have passed on to their children.- Yet some of these patients were highly educated : A few of them were actually psychiatrists them- selves. I viddly recall the case of a professor who had had a sudden vision and thought he was insane. He came to see me in a state of com- plete panic. I simply took a 400-year-old book from the shelf and showed him an old woodcut depicting his very vision. "There's no reason for you to believe that you're insane," I said to him. "They knew about your vision 400 years ago." Whereupon he sat do^vn entirely deflated, but once more normal. A very important case came to me from a man who was himself a psy'chiatrist. One day he brought me a handuTitten booklet he had received as a Christmas present from his 10- year-old daughter. It contained a whole series of dreams she had had ^vhen she was eight. Urey made up the tveirdest series of dreams that I have ever seen, and I could well under- stand why her father was more than just puz- zled by them. Though childlike, they were un- canny, and they contained images %vhose origin was wholly incomprehensible to the father. Here are the relevant motifs from the dreams : 1. "The evil animal," a snakelike monster with many horns, kills and devours all other animals. But God comes from the four comers, being in fact four separate gods, and gives rebirth to all the dead animals. 2. An ascent into heaven, where pagan dances are being celebrated; and a descent into hell, where angels are doing good deeds. 3. A horde of small animals frightens the dreamer. The animals increase to a tremendous size, and one of them devours the little girl. 4. A small mouse is penetrated by worms, snakes, fishes, and human beings. Thus the mouse becomes human. This portrays the four stages of the origin of mankind. 5. A drop of water is seen, as it appears when looked at through a microscope. The girl sees that the drop is full of tree branches. This por- trays the origin of the world. 6. A bad boy has a clod of earth and throws bits of it at everyone who passes. In this way all the passers-by become bad. 7. A drunken woman falls into the water and comes out renewed and sober. 8. The scene is in America, where many people are rolling on an ant heap, attacked by the ants. The dreamer, in a panic, falls into a river. 9. There is a desert on the moon where the dreamer sinks so deeply into the ground that she reaches hell. 10. In this dream the girl has a vision of a luminous ball. She touches it. Vapors emanate from it. A man comes and kills her. 11. The girl dreams she is dangerously ill. Sud- denly birds come out of her skin and cover her completely. 12. Swarms of gnats obscure the sun, the moon, and all the stars, except one. That one star falls upon the dreamer. In the unabridged German original, each dream begins with the words of the old fairy Parallelsto archetypal motifs in the girl's firstdream (p. 70) : Left,from Strasbourg Cathedral, Christ crucifiedonAdam'sgrave -- symbolizing thetheme ofrebirth (Christ asthesecondAdam). In a Navahosand painting, above, the horned heads are the fourcorners oftheworld. In Britain's royal coronation ceremony,the monarch (right. Queen Elizabeth II in 1953) is presented tothe peopleatthe fourdoors ofWestminsterAbbey. tale ; "Once upon a time, . . By these tvords the little dreamer suggests that she feels as if each dream tvere a sort of fairy tale, tvhich she tvants to tell her father as a Christmas present. The father tried to explain the dreams in terms of their context. But he could not do so, for there seemed to be no personal associations to them. The possibility that these dreams were con- scious elaborations can of course be ruled out only by someone tyho kne\v the child well enough to be absolutely sure of her truthfulness. (They would, ho^vever, remain a challenge to our understanding even if they were fantasies.) In this case, the father was convinced that the dreams were authentic, and I have no reason to doubt it. I knew the little girl myself, but this was before she gave her dreams to her father, so that I had no chance to ask her about them. She lived abroad and died of an infectious disease about a year after that Christmas. Her dreams have a decidedly peculiar char- acter. Their leading thoughts are markedly philosophic in concept. The first one, for instance, speaks of an evil monster killing other animals, but God gives rebirth to them aU through a divine Apokatastasis, or restitution. In the Western world this idea is known through the Christian tradition. It can be found in the Acts of the Apostles 111:21 : "[Christ] whom the heaven must receive until the time of restitution of all things. . . ." The early Greek Fathers of the Church (for instance, Origen) particularly insisted upon the idea that, at the end of time, everything will be restored by the Redeemer to its original and perfect state. But, according to St. Matthew XVII : 11, there was already an old Jewish tradition that Elias "truly shall first come, and restore all things." I Corin- thians XV :22 refers to the same idea in the following words ; "For as inAdam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." One might guess that the child had encoun- tered this thought in her religious education. But she had very little religious background. Her parents were Protestants in name; but in fact they knew the Bible only from hearsay. It is particularly unlikely that the recondite image of Apokatastasis had been explained to the girl. Certainly her father had never heard of this mythical idea. Nine of the 12 dreams are influenced by the theme of destruction and restoration. And none of these dreams shows traces of specific Chris- tian education or influence. On the contrary, they are more closely related to primitive' myths. This relation is corroborated by the other motif -- ^the "cosmogonic myth" (the cre- ation of the world and of man) that appears in the fourth and fifth dreams. The same connec- tion is found in I CorinthiansXV :22, which I have just quoted. In this passage too, Adam and Christ (death and resurrection) are linked together. The general idea of Christ the Redeemer belongs to the world-wide and pre-Christ theme of the hero and rescuer who, although he has '"1 The girl'sseconddream -- ofangels in hellanddemons in heaven -- seemstoembodythe idea ofthe relativity of morality.Thesame concept isexpressed in thedual aspectofthe fallen angelwho is both Satan,the devil,and (right) Lucifer, theresplendent bringer of light.These oppositescan also beseen in thefigure ofGod, far right (in a drawing by Blake) : He appearstoJob, in a dream,with a cloven hoof like a demon's. Above,the hero-god Raven (ofthe Haidu Indians ofAmerica's Pacific Coast) in the bellyofawhale -- correspondingtothe"devouring monster" motif inthe girl's first dream (p.70). jfJ- been de\'oured by a monster, appears again in a miraculous way, ha\'ing overcome rvhatever monster it was that swallorved him, 'When and where such a motif originated nobody knor\-s. 'We do not even knorv how to go about investi- gating the problem. The one apparent certainty is that every generation seerhs to have knorra it as a tradition handed dorra from some preced- ing time. Thus rs-e can safely assume that it "originated" at a period rvhen man did not yet know that he possessed a hero m^th ; in an age, that is to say, when he did not yet consciously reflect on rvhat he rvas saving. The hero figure is an archetj'pe, tvhich has existed since time immemorial. The production of archeU-pes by children is especially significant, because one can some- times be quite certain that a child has had no direct access to the tradition concerned. In this case, the girl's family had no more than a superficial acquaintance rsith the Christian tra- dition. Christian themes may, of course, be represented by such ideas as God, angels, hea- ven, hell, and evil. But the rs'ay in rvhich they are treated by this child points to a totally non-Christian origin. Let us take the first dream of the God who really consists of four gods, coming from the "four comers." The comers of rvhat? There is no room mentioned in the dream. A room would not even fit in r\ith the picture of rvhat is ob\iously a cosmic event, in which the Uni- versal Being himself inter\'enes. The quatemity (or element of "foumess") itself is a strange idea, but one that plan's a great role in many religions and philosophies. In the Christian re- ligion, it has been superseded by the Trinity, a notion that we must assume rvas knorm to the child. But rs'ho in an ordinary middle-class family of today would be likely to knors' of a dhine quatemity? It is an idea that rvas once fairly familiar among students of the Hermetic philosophy in the Middle Ages, but it petered out with the beginning of the 18th century, and it has been entirely obsolete for at least 200 years. Where, then, did the little girl pick it up? \V^tKDreams uporrmybeddioa>scarestme <S£alIiiglrtestme witKVjsjoitS 73 From Ezekiel's \ision? But there is no Christian teaching that identifies the seraphim ^\ith God. The same question may be asked about the homed serpent. In the Bible, it is true, there are many homed animals -- ^in the Book of Revelation, for instance. But all these seem to be quadmped, although their overlord is the dragon, the Greek word for ^vhich {drakon) also means serpent. The homed serpent appears in Ifith-centuiy' Latin alchemy as the quadricor- nuius serpens (four-homed serpent), a s\Tnbol of Mercury' and an antagonist of the Christian Trinity. But this is an obscure reference. So far as I can discover, it is made by only one author; and this child bad no means of tno«'- ingit. In the second dream, a motif appears that is definitely non-Chiistian and that contains a re- versal of accepted values -- ^for instance, pagan dances by men in heaven and good deeds by angels in hell. This symbol suggests a relati\'ity of moral values. 'Where did the child find such a re\'olutionaiy- notion, tvoithy of Nietzsche's genius? These questions lead us to another : 'What is the compensatory- meaning of these dreams, to which the little girl obrioirsly attributed so much importance that she presented them to her father as a Christmas present? K the dreamer had been a primitive medi- cine man, one could reasonably assume that they represent variations of the philosophical themes of death, of resurrection or restitution, of the origin of the world, the creation of man , and the relatiMty of values. But one might gh'e up such dreams as hopelessly difficult if one tried to interpret them from a personal le\'el. They undoubtedly contain "collective images," and the^- are in a way analogous to the doc- trines taught to young people in primidve tribes when they are about to be initiated as men. At such times they learn about ^^hat God, or the gods, or the "founding" animals have done, ho\v the world and man were created, horv the end of the ^s'orld will come, and the meaning of death. Is there any occasion \vhen ^s'e, in Chris- tian ch-ilization, hand out similar instructions? There is : in adolescence. But many people begin to think again of things like this in old age, at the approach of death. The little girl, as it happened, ts'as in both these situations. She was approaching pubeity' and, at the same time, the end of her life. Little or nothing in the s>mbolism of her dreams The little girl'sdreams (p. 70) containsymbolsofcreation,death, and rebirth,which resemble the teachingsghrentoadolescents in primitive initiation rituals. Left, theendofa Navahoceremony: A girl,having become awoman, goes intothe desertto meditate. Deathand rebirthsymbolismalso appears indreamsattheendof life,whentheapproach ofdeath castsashadowbefore it Right one ofGoya's lastpaintings:The strange creature,apparentlya dog,thatemergesfromthedark can be interpreted asthe artist's foreshadov/ing ofhisdeath. In manymythologiesdogsappearas guidestothe land ofthedead. points to tlic beginning of a normal adult life, but there are many allusions to destruction and restoration. When I first read her dreams, in- deed, I had the uncanny feeling that they sug- gested impending disaster. Tlie reason I felt like that was the peculiar nature of the com- {jcnsation that I deduced from the s)Tnbolism. It \vas the opposite of ^vhat one would c.\pect to find in the consdousness of a girl of that age. These dreams open up a nc\s- and rather terrifdng aspect of life and death. One would c.\pect to find sudi images in an aging person who looks back upon life, rather than to be given them by a child who ^vould normally be looking fonvard. Tlidr atmosphere recalls the old Roman saving. "Life is a short dream," rather than the joy and e.\uberance of its springtime. For this child's life was like a ver sacTimi vovendum (the vow of a vernal sacri- fice), as the Roman poet puts it. Experience shore's tliat the unkno'vn approach of death casts an adumbralio (an anticipator)' shadow) over the life and dreams of the victim. Even the altar in Christian churches represents, on the one hand, a tomb and, on the other, a place of resurrection -- the transformation of death into eternal life. F i Such arc the ideas that the dreams brought home to the child. They were a preparation for death, expressed through short stories, like the talcs told at primitive initiations or the Koans of Zen Buddhism. This message is unlike the orthodox Christian doctrine and more like ancient primitive thought. It seems to have originated outside historical tradition in the long-fbrgottcn ps^'chic sources that, since pre- historic times, have nourished philosophical and religious, speculations about life and death. It ^\•as as if future events were casting tlieir shadow back by arousing in the child certain thought forms tliat, though normally dormant, describe or accompany the approach of a fatal issue. /Mthough_the_spj:cificjhapc in ts-hich they express thcinsdvcsJs_more or less personal, their general p.attcm_is ..collectivc._ Tficy"^c found C cvcr)'whcre and at all times, just as animal instincts \ajy a good deal in the different species and yet serve the same general pur- poses. \Vc do not assume tliat each ne\s'-bom animal creates its oivn instincts as an indiddual acquisition, and we must not suppose that human individuals invent their specific human wa)^ irith ever)' new birth. Like tlieJnstincts, tlic collective thought patterns ofJhc human mm3 arc innate and inherited. They function, ivliciT the occasion arises, in more or less the same ivay in all of us. Emotional manifestations, to which such thought patterns belong, arc recognizably the same all over the earth. ^Vc can identify them even in animals, and the animals themselves understand one another in this respect, even though they may belong to different species. .And what about insects, irith their complicated s)'mbiotic functions? Most of them do not even knois' their parents and have nobody to teach them. \\'hy should one assume, then, that man is the only lidng being deprived of specific instincts, or that his psyche is devoid of all traces of its evolution? Naturally, if you identify the psyche with consciousness, you can easily fall into the erro- neous idea that man comes into the world with a ps)'che that is empty, and that in later years it contains nothing more than what it has learned by individual experience. But the psyche is more than consciousness. Animals have little consciousness, but many impulses and reactions that denote the existence of a psyche ; and primitives do a lot of things whose meaning is unknown to them. You may ask many civilized people in vain for the real meaning of the Christmas tree or of the Easter egg. The fact is, they do things without knowing why they do them. I am inclined to the view that things were generally done first and that it was only a long time afterward that somebody asked why they were done. The medical psychologist is constantly confronted with otherwise intelligent patients who behave in a peculiar and unpredictable way and who have no inkling of v/hat they say or do. They are suddenly caught by unreason- able moods for which they themselves cannot account. Superficially, such reactions and impulses seem to be of an intimately personal nature, and so we dismiss them as idiosyncratic be- havior. In fact, they are based upon a pre- formed and ever-ready instinctive system that is characteristic of man. Thought forms, univer- sally understandable gestures, and many atti- tudes follow a pattern that was established long beforeman developed a reflective consciousness. It is even conceivable that the early origins of man's capacity to reflect come from the pain- ful consequences of violent emotional clashes. Let me take, purely as an illustration of this point, the bushman who, in a moment of anger and disappointment at his failure to catch any fish, strangles his much beloved only son, and is then seized with immense regret as he holds the little dead body in his arms. Such a man might remember this moment of pain for ever. We cannot know whether this kind of experi- ence was actually the initial cause of the de- velopment of human consciousness. But there is no doubt that the shock of a similar emo- tional experience is often needed to make people wake up and pay attention to what they are doing. There is the famous case of a 13th- century Spanish hidalgo, Raimon Lull, who fin- ally (after a long chase) succeeded in meeting the lady he admired at a secret rendezvous. She silently opened her dress and showed him her breast, rotten with cancer. The shock changed Lull's life; he eventually became an eminent theologian and one of the Church's greatest missionaries. In the case of such a sudden change one can often prove that an archetype has been at work for a long time in the uncon- scious, skilfully arranging circumstances that will lead to the crisis. Such experiences s^m to show that arche- typal forms are not just static patterns. They are dynamic factors that manifest AmiseIvS in impulses, just as spontaneously as the in- stincts. Certain dreams, visions, or thoughts can suddenly appear; and however carefully one investigates, one cannot find out what causes them. This does not mean that they have no cause ; they certainly have. But it is so remote or obscure that one caimot see what it is. In Somedreamsseem to predictthe future (perhapsdue to unconscious knowledge of future possibiiities) ; thusdreamswereiong used as divination. In Greecethe sick wouldaskthe healinggod Askiepios foradream indicating a cure. Left, a reiiefdepictssuch adream cure : Asnake (thegod'ssymbol) bites a man'sdiseased shoulderandthe god (far left) healsthe shoulder. Far right, Constantine (an Italian painting c. 1460) dreaming before a battlethatwastomakehim Roman Emperor. Hedreamed ofthe chi-rho, a symbol ofChrist (right),and a voicesaid : "In thissignyou will conquer."Hetookthe sign as his emblem,won the battle,andwas thusconvertedto Christianity. such a case, one must wait either until the dream and its meaning are sufficiently under- stood, or until some external event occurs that will explain the dream. At the moment of the dream, this event may still lie in the future. But just as our conscious thoughts often occupy themselves with the future and its possibilities, so do the unconscious and its dreams. There has long been a general belief that the chief function of dreams is prog- nostication of the future. In antiquity, and as late as the Middle Ages, dreams played their part in medical prognosis. I can confirm by a modem dream the element of prognosis (or pre- cognition) that can be found in an old dream quoted by Artemidorus of Daldis, in the second century a.d. ; A man dreamed that he saw his father die in the flames of a house on fire. Not long afterward, he himself died in a phlegmone (fire, or high fever), which I presume was pneumonia. It so happened that a colleague of mine was once suffering from a deadly gangrenous fever -- in fact, a phlegmone. A former patient of his, who had no knowledge of the nature of his doctor's illness, dreamed that the doctor died in a great fire. At that time the doctor had just entered a hospital and the disease was only beginning. The dreamer knew nothing but the bare fact that his doctor was ill and in a hospital. Three weeks later, the doctor died. As this example shows, dreams may have an anticipatory or prognostic aspect, and anybody trying to interpret them must take this into consideration, especially where an obviously meaningful dream does not provide a context sufficient to explain it. Such a dream often comes right out of the blue, and one wonders what could have prompted it. Of course, if one knew its ulterior message, its cause would be clear. For it is only our consciousness that does not yet know; the unconscious seems already informed, and to have come to a conclusion that is expressed in the dream. In fact, the un- conscious seems to be able to examine and to draw conclusions from facts,much as conscious- ness does. It can even use certain facts, and anticipate their possible results, just because we are not conscious of them. But as far as one can make out from dreams, the unconscious makes its deliberations instinc- tively. The distinction is important. Logical analysis is the prerogative of consciousness; we select with reason and knowledge. The uncon- scious, however, seems to be guided chiefly by instinctive trends, represented by corresponding thought forms -- that is, by the archetypes. A doctor who is asked to describe the course of an illness will use such rational concepts as "infection" or "fever." The dream is more poetic. It presents the diseased body as a man's earthly house, and the fever as the fire that is destroying it. As the above dream shows, the archetypal mind has handled the situation in the sameway as it did in the time of Artemidorus. Something that is of a more or less unknown nature has been intuitively grasped by the unconscious and submitted to an archetypal treatment. This sug- gests that, instead of the process of reasoning that conscious thought would have applied, the archetypal mind has stepped in and taken over In adreamquotedfromArtemidorus on this page,aburning house symbolizes a fever.Thehuman body is often represented as a house ; Left,from an 18th-century Hebrew encyclopedia,thebodyand a house arecompared indetail -- turrets as ears,windows aseyes, afurnace asstomach, etc. Right, in a cartoon byJamesThurber, a henpecked husbandsees hishome and hiswife asthesame being. the task of prognostication. The archetypes thus have their own initiative and their own specific energy. These po^vers enable them both to pro- duce a meaningful interpretation (in their own symbolic style) and to interfere in a given situa- tion r\ith their o^vn impulses and their own thought formations. In this respect, they func- tion like comple.\es; they come and go very much as they please, and often they obstruct or modify our conscious intentions in an embar- rassing way. One can perceive the specific energy of archetypes when we experience the peculiar fascination that accompanies them. They seem to hold a special spell. Such a peculiar quality is also characteristic of the personal complexes ; and just as personal complexes have their indi- wdual history', so do social complexes of an archetypal character. But wliile personal com- plexes never producem^elliarra personal bias, 'archetypes create myths, religions, and philoso- ^ pHieT^that influence and characterize ^vhole Fatibns^and' epochs of"fiisfory. We regard the personal complex^ as compensations for one- sided or faulty attitudes of consciousness; in the same ^vay, myths of a . religious naturej:an be interpreted as a sort of mental therapy for the sufferings _and anxi^es of mankind in general -- ^nger^JV.ar,JiseasCj^lc^ag^^^aA. The universal hero myth, for example, always refers to a powerful man or god-man who vanquishes evil in the form of dragons, serpents, monsters, demons, and so on, and ^vho liberates his people from destruction and death. The narration or ritual repetition of sacred texts and ceremonies, and the worship of such a figure with dances, music, hymns, prayers, and sacrifices, grip the audience with numinous emotions (as if with magic spells) and exalt the individual to an identification with the hero. If ^ve try to see such a situation rvith the eyes of the believer, we can perhaps understand how the ordinary man can be liberated from his personal impotence and misery and en- dowed (at least temporarily) with an almost superhuman quality. Often enough such a con- viction will sustain him for a long time and give a certain style to his life. It may even set the tone of a whole society. A remarkable instance of this can be found in the Eleusinian mysteries, ivhich were finally suppressed in the beginning of the seventh century of the Chris- tian era. They expressed, together with the Delphic oracle, the essence and spirit of ancient Greece. On a much greater scale, the Christian era itself owes its name and significance to the antique mystery of the god-man, which has its roots in the archetypal Osiris-Horus myth of ancient Egypt. It is commonly assumed that on some given occasion in prehistoric times, the basic mytho- logical ideas \vere "invented" by a clever old philosopher or prophet, and ever aftenvard "believed" by a credulous and uncritical people. It is said that stories told by a power- seeking priesthood are not "true," but merely "wishful thinking." But the very word "invent" is derived from the Latin invenire, and means to "find" and hence to find something by "seek- ing" it. In the latter case the ^vord itself hints at some foreknotvledge of what you are going to find. The energyofarchetypes canbe focused (through ritualsand other appealstomassemotion) tomove people to collective action.The Nazisknew this,and used versions ofTeutonic mythsto help rally the countrytotheircause. Far right, a propaganda painting ofH itieras a heroic crusader ; right, a solstice festivai celebrated insummerby the HitlerYouth, a revival ofan ancientpagan festival. it'.,- •V- i!* - -/ * 'T '^v • Top, a child's painting of Christmas includesthe familiartree decorated with candles.Theevergreen tree is connectedwith Christthroughthe symbolism ofthewintersolstice andthe"newyear" (theneweon of Christianity).There aremany links between Christand the treesymbol : The cross is oftenseen as a tree, as in a medieval Italian fresco, left, of Christcrucified onthe tree ofknowledge. Candles in Christian ceremoniessymbolizedivine light, as in theSwedish Christmas festival above,wherethe girlswearcrowns ofburning candles. 8o Let me go back to the strange ideas con- tained in the dreams of the little girl. It seems unlikely that she sought them out, since she was surprised to find them. They occurred to her rather as peculiar and unexpected stories, tvhich seemed noteworthy enough to be given to her father as a Christmas present. In doing so, how- ever, she lifted them up into the sphere of our still living Christian m)-ster)' -- the birth of our Lord, mbced with the secret of the evergreen tree that carries the new-born Light. (Tliis is the reference of the fiftli dream.) Although there is ample historical evidence for the s)Tnbolic relation between Christ and the tree symbol, the little girl's parents tvould have been gravely embarrassed had they been asked to explain exactly rvhat they meant by decorating a tree tvith burning candles to cele- brate the nativity of Christ. "Oh, it's just a Christmas custom!" they would have said. A serious anstver would require a far-reaching dissertation about the antique symbolism of the djing god, and its relation to the cult of the Great Mother and her symbol, the tree -- to mention only one aspect of this complicated problem. The furtlier tve delve into the origins of a j' 'collective,im a ge' ) (or, to express it in ecclesi- j astical language, of a dogma), the more wo un- | cover a seemingly unending -web of archetypal ' patterns that, before modem times, ^vere never j the object of conscious reflection. Thus, para- i doxically enough, we know more about mytlto- i logical symbolism than did any generation before our o\vn. The fact is that in former times 1 men did not reflect upon their symbols; they j^ ^vedTEem and tvere unconsciously animated by j their meaning. I wall illustrate this by an experience I once had tvith the primitives of Mount Elgon in Africa. Every morning at dawn, they leave their huts and breathe or spit into their hands, tvhich they then stretch out to the first rays of the sun, as if they ^vere offering either their breath or their spittle to the rising god -- to mungu. (This S'svahili word, tvhich they used in explaining the ritual act, is derived from a Polymesian root equivalent to mana or miiliingu. These and similar terms designate a "power" of extra- ordinary efficiency and pen-asiveness, ^vhich we should call di%me. Thus the tvord mungu is their equivalent for Allah or God.) AVhen I asked them tvhat they meant by this act, or tvhy they did it, they tvere completely baffled. They could only say : "We have always done it. It has always been done when the sun rises." They laughed at the obvious conclusion that the sun is mungu. The sim indeed is not mungu when it is above horizon ; mungu is the actual moment of the sunrise. ^Vhat they were doing was obvious to me, but not to them ; they just did it, never reflect- ing on what they did. They tvere consequently unable to explain themselves. I concluded that they ^vere offering their souls to mungu, be- cause the breath (of life) and the spittle mean "soul-substance." To breathe or spit upon something conveys a "magical" effect, as, for instance, tvhen Christ used spittle to cure the blind, or tvhere a son inhales his dydng father's last breath in order to take over the father's soul. It is most unlikely that these Africans ever, even in the remote past, knew any more about the meaning of their ceremony. In fact, their ancestors probably knetv even less, because they were more profoundly unconscious of their motives and thought less about their doings. Goethe's Faust aptly says : "Im Anfang war die Tat [In the beginning ^vas the deed]." "Deeds" ^vere never invented, they were done ; thoughts, on the other hand, are a relatively late discover)' of man. First he was moved to deeds by unconscious factors ; it ^vas only a long time afterward that he began to reflect upon the causes that had moved him; and it took him a very long time indeed to arrive at the preposterous idea that he must have moved himself -- his mind being unable to identify any other motivating force than his own. We should laugh at the idea of a plant or an animal inventing itself, yet there are many people who believe that the psyche or mind invented itself and thus was the creator of its ow'n existence. As a matter of fact, the mind has grown to its present state of consciousness as an acorn gross's into an oak or as saurians J- n cJ" developed into mammals. As it has for so long been developing, so it still develops, and thus we are moved by forces from within as well as by stimuli from without. These inner motives spring from a deep source that is not made by consciousness and is not under its control. In the mythology of earlier times, these forces were called mana, or spirits, demons, and gods. They are as active today as they ever were. If they conform to our wishes, we call them happy hunches or impulses and pat ourselves-on the back for being smart fHlows. If they go against us, then we say that it is just bad luck, or that certain people are against us, or that the cause of our misfortunes must be pathological. The one thing we refuse to admit is that we are dependent upon "powers" that are beyond our control. It is true, however, that in recent times civil- ized man has acquired a certain amount of will power, which he can apply where he pleases. He has learned to do his work efficiently with- out having recourse to chanting and drumming to hypnotize him into the state of doing. He can even dispense with a daily prayer for divine aid. He can carry out what he proposes to do, and he can apparently translate his ideas into action without a hitch, whereas the primitive seems to be hampered at each step by fears, superstitions, and other unseen obstacles to action. The motto "Where there's a will, there's a way" is the superstition of modem man. Yet in order to sustain his creed, contem- porary man pays the price in a remarkable lack of introspection. He is blind to the fact that, with all his rationality and efficiency, he is possessed by "powers" that are beyond his con- trol. His gods and demons have not disappeared at all ; they have merely got new names. They keep him on the run with restlessness, vague apprehensions, psychological complications, an insatiable need for pills, alcohol, tobacco, food -- and, above all, a large array of neuroses. Two examples of belief in the "magical" quality of breath ; Below left, a Zulu witch doctorcures a patient by blowing into his ear through a cow's horn (to drive the spirits out) ; below, a medieval painting ofthe creation depicts God breathing life intoAdam. Right, in a 1 3th-century Italian painting. Christ heals a blind man with spittle -- which, like breath, has long been believed to have a life- giving ability. The soul of man What ^ve call civilized consciousness has steadily separated itseK from the basic instincts. But these instincts have not disappeared. They have merely lost their contact wth our consciousness and are thus forced to assert themselves in an indirect fashion. This may be by means of ph)'sical sjTnptoms in the case of a neurosis, or by means of incidents of various kinds, like im- accountable moods, unexpected forgetfulness, or mistakes in speech. A man likes to believe that he is the master of his soul. But as long as he is imable to control liis moods and emotions, or to be conscious of the m^Tiad secret wa^-s in which unconscious factors insinuate themselves into his arrange- ments and decisions, he is certainly not his o\vn master. These unconscious factors owe their existence to the autonomy of the archetypes. Modem man protects himself against seeing his owm split state by a system of compartments. Certain areas of outer life and of his own behavior are kept, as it were, in separate dra^vers and are never confronted %vith one another. As an example of this so-called compartment psychology, I remember the case of an alcoholic who had come under the laudable influence of a certain religious movement, and, fascinated by its enthusiasm, had forgotten that he needed a drink. He ^vas obviously and miraculously cured by Jesus, and he was correspondingly displayed as a witness to divine grace or to the eSiciency of the said religious organization. But after a few' weeks of public confessions, the novelty began to pale and some alcoholic re- freshment seemed to be indicated, and so he drank again. But this time the helpful organ- ization came to the conclusion that the case was "pathological" and obviously not suitable for an inteiwention by Jesus, so they put him into a clinic to let the doctor do better than the divine Healer. This is an aspect of the modem "cultural" mind that is worth looking into. It shows an alarming degree of dissociation and psjxho- logical confusion. If, for a moment, rve regard mankind as one indi\'idual, rve see that the human race is like a person carried ar\'ay by unconscious powers; and the human race also likes to keep certain problems tucked away in separate dra;eers. But this is rvhy we should give a great deal of con- sideration to rs'hat -we are doing, for mankind is norv threatened by self-created and deadly dangers that are gro\s-ing beyond our control. Our ^vorld is, so to sjreak, dissociated like a neurotic, witli the Iron Curtain marking the symbolic hne of ditision. iVestem man, becom- ing arvare of the aggressive t\'ill to power of the East, sees himself forced to take e.\traordin- ar)' measures of defense, at the same time as he prides himself on his virtue and good intentions. What he fails to see is that it is his own vices, which he has covered up by good international manners, that are tl^ro^s•n back in his face by the commimist world, shamelessly and meth- odically. 'What tlie iVest has tolerated, but secretly and vsith a slight sense of shame (the diplomatic lie, sj-stematic deception, veiled threats), comes back into the open and in full measure from the East and ties us up in neu- rotic knots. It is the face of his ovsti evil shadow that grins at 'Western man from the other side of the Iron Curtain. It is this state of affairs that explains the peculiar feeling of helplessness of so many people in 'Western societies. They have begun to realize that tlie difficulties confronting us are moral problems, and that the attempts to answer them by a policy of piling up nuclear arms or by economic "competition" is achiev- ing little, for it cuts both wav-s. Many of us nou' understand that moral and mental means would be more efficient, since they could pro- vide us vsith psj'chic immunity against the ever- increasing infection. "Ourworld isdissociated like a neurotic." Left,the BerlinWall. But all such attempts have proved singularly ineffectiv'e, and vsill do so as long as vs-e tr)' to convince ourselves and the world that it is only they (i.e., our opponents) who are vsTOng. It would be much more to the point for us to make a serious attempt to recognize our own shadovs' and its nefarious doings. If we could see our shadovs' (the dark side of our natiu-e), vs-e should be immune to any moral and mental infection and insinuation. As matters novs' stand, vs'e lay ourselves open to every infection, because we are really doing practically the same thing as they. Only vs'e have the addi- tional disadvantage that we neither see nor vs'ant to understand vs'hat we ourselves are doing., under the cover of good manners. The communist vs-orld, it may be noted, has one big m)'th (vs'hich vs-e call an illusion, in the vain hope that our superior Judgment vsiU make it disappear). It is the time-hallovs'ed archet)'pal dream of a Golden Age (or Para- dise), vs'here everything is provided in abund- ance for ever)'one, and a great. Just, and vs-ise chief rules over a human kindergarten. This powerful archetj-pe in its infantile form has gripped them, but it will never disappear from the world at the mere sight of our superior point of view. We even support it by our own childishness, for our 'Western civilization is in the grip of the same mv'thology. Unconsciously, we cherish the same prejudices, hopes, and expectations. ^Ve too believe in the welfare state, in universal peace, in the equality of man, in his eternal human rights, in Justice, truth, and (do not say it too loudly) in the Kingdom of God on Earth. The sad truth is that man's real life consists of a complex of inexorable opposites -- day and night, birth and death, happiness and miseiy, good and evil. ^Ve are not even sure that one will prevail against the other, that good will overcome evil, or Joy defeat pain. Life is a battleground. It alwavs has been, and always will be; and if it were not so, existence would come to an end. It was precisely this conflict within man that led the early Ghristians to expect and hope for an early end to this world, or the Buddhists to Everysocietyhas its idea ofthe archetypal paradiseorgoldenage that, it is believed,once existed and vrill existagain. Left,a 19th- centuryAmerican painting embodies the idea ofa pastutopia ; Itshows William Penn'streatyini682v/hh the Indiansoccurring inan ideal settingwhere all isharmonyand peace. Below left, a reflection of the idea ofa utopiayettocome: A posterin a Moscowparkshows Lenin leading the Russian people toward the future. f. Above,theGarden of Eden,depicted as a walled (andwomb-like) garden in a 1 5th-century French painting, andshowingthe expulsion ofAdam and Eve. Right, a "goldenage" of primitive naturalness ispictured in a 16th-centurypainting by Cranach (entitled £arr/i/yF'aracffse). Farright, the 1 6th-century Flemish artist Brueghel'slandofCokaygne. a mythical land ofsensual delights andeasy Irving (stories ofwhich werewidelypopularin medieval Europe, especiallyamongthe hard- working peasantsand serfs). reject all earthly desires and aspirations. These basic answers tvould be frankly suicidal if they tvere not linked up with peculiar mental and moral ideas and practices that constitute the bulk of both religions and that, to a certain extent, modify their radical denial of the tvorld. I stress this point because, in our time, there are millions of people tvho have lost faith in any kind of religion. Such people do not under- stand their religion any longer. ^Vhile life runs smoothly wthout religion, the loss remains as good as unnoticed. But ^vhen suffering comes, it is another matter. That is when people begin to seek a way out and to reflect about the meaning of life and its bewildering and painful experiences. It is significant that the psychological doctor (within my experience) is consulted more by Jc\\'s and Protestants than by Catholics. This might be expected, for the Catholic Church still feels responsible for the cura animarum (the care of the soul's ^velfare). But in this scientific age, the ps^'chiatrist is apt to be asked the questions that once belonged in the domain of the theologian. People feel that it makes, or would make, a great difference if only they had a positive belief in a meaningful way of life or in God and immortality. The specter of ap- proaching death often gives a powerful incen- tive to such thoughts. From time immemorial, men have had ideas about a Suprme Being (one or several) and about the Land of the Hereafter. Only today do they think they can do ts'ithout such ideas. Because we cannot discover God's throne in the sk}' \s'ith a radiotelescope or establish (for certain) that a beloved father or mother is still about in a more or less corporeal form, people assume that such ideas are "not true." I would rather say that they are not "true" enough, for these are conceptions of a kind that have accompanied hiunan life from pre- historic times, and that still break through into consciousness at any provocation. Modem man may assert that he can dispense \vith them, and he may bolster his opinion by insisting that there is no scientific endence of their truth. Or he may even regret the loss of his convictions. But since we are dealing with invisible and unknowable things (for God is beyond human understand- ing, and there is no means of proving immor- tality), why should wc bother about evidence? Even if we did not kno\s' by reason our need for salt in our food, we should nonetheless profit from its use. We might argue that the use of salt is a mere illusion of taste or a superstition; but it would still contribute to our well-being. \Vhy, then, should ^ve deprive ourselves of views that would prove helpful in crises and would give a meaning to our existence? And how do we know that such ideas are not tnie? Many people \vould agree ^vith me if I stated flady that such ideas are probably illusions. What they fail to reahze is that the denial is as impossible to "prove" as the assertion of religious belief. W'e are entirely free to choose ^vhich point of view rve take; it will in any case be an arbitrary- decision. There is, however, a strong empirical reason why we should cultivate droughts that can never be proved. It is that they are known to be useful. Man positively needs general ideas and convictions that ^^•ill give a meaning to his life and enable him to find a place for himself in the universe. He can stand die most incredible hardships when he is com'inced that they make sense; he is crushed when, on top of all his misfortunes, he has to admit that he is taking part in a "tale told by an idiot." It is the role of religious sj-mbols to give a meaning to the life of man. The Pueblo Indians belie\-e that they are the sons of Father Sun, and this belief endows their life ^\•ith a perspecdve (and a goal) that goes far beyond their limited e.xistence. It gives them ample space for the unfolding of personality and permits them a full life as complete persons. Their plight is infinitely more satis- factory- than that of a man in our own ciHliza- don who knows drat he is (and will remain) nothing more than an underdog with no inner meaning to his life. A sense of a ^\'ider meaning to one's cxkt- ence is vvhat raises a man beyond mere getting and spending. If he lacks this sense, he is lost and miserable. Had St. Paul been con- \-inced that he ^vas nothing more than a Left,aSouthAmerican tribe's ritual boatburial.Thedeadman, placed in hisown canoe, isgiven foodandclothing forhisjourney. Religioussymbolsand beliefsof everykind givemeaning tomen's lives :Ancientpeoplesgrieved over death (right,an Egyptian figurine representing mourning,whichwas found in atomb) ;yettheir beliefs madethem alsothink ofdeath asa positivetransformation. wandering ts-eaver of carpets, he certainly would not have been the man he was. His real and meaningful life lay in the inner certainty that he ^\•as the messenger of the Lord. One may accuse him of suffering from megalo- mania, but this opinion pales before the testi- mony of history' and the judgment of sub- sequent generations. The myth that took possession of him made him something greater than a mere craftsman. Such a myth, however, consists of sy'mbols that have not been invented consciously. They have happened. It was not the man Jesus who created the myth of the god-man. It existed for many centuries before his birth. He himself was seized by this symbolic idea, which, as St. Mark tells us, lifted him out of the narrow life of the Nazarene carpenter. Myths go back to the primitive storyteller and his dreams, to men moved by the stirring of their fantasies. These people were not very different from those whom later generations have called poets or philosophers. Primitive story tellers did not concern themselves with the origin of their fantasies ; it was very much later that people began to wonder where a story originated. Yet, centuries ago, in what we now call "ancient" Greece, men's minds were advanced enough to surmise that the tales of the gods were nothing but archaic and exaggerated traditions of long-buiied kings or chieftains. Men already took the view that the myth was too improbable to mean what it said. They therefore tried to reduce it to a generally understandable form. In more recent times, we have seen the same thing happen with dream symbolism. We became aware, in the years when psychology was in its infancy, that dreams had some importance. But just as the Greeks persuaded themselves that their myths were merely elab- orations of rational or "normal" history, so some of the pioneers of psychology came to the conclusion that dreams did not mean what they appeared to mean. The images or symbols that they presented were dismissed as bizarre forms in which repressed contents of the psyche appeared to the conscious mind. It thus came to be taken for granted that a dream meant something other than its obvious statement. I have already described my disagreement with this idea -- a disagreement that led me to study the form as well as the content of dreams. Why should they mean something different from their contents? Is there any- thing in nature that is other than it is? The dream is a normal and natural phenomenon, and it does not mean something it is not. The Talmud even says ; "The dream is its own interpretation." The confusion arises because the dream's contents are symbolic and thus have more than one meaning. The symbols point in different directions from those we apprehend with the conscious mind ; and there- fore they relate-to something either unconscious or at least not entirely conscious. Above, a child'sdrawing of a tree (withthesun above it).Atree is one ofthe bestexamples ofa motif that often appears in dreams (and elsewhere) and thatcan havean incrediblevariety ofmeanings. It mightsymbolize evolution, physical growth, or psychological maturation ; itmightsymbolize sacrifice or death (Christ's crucifixiononthe tree) ; itmight be a phallic symbol ; itmightbe a great deal more.And such othercommon dream motifs asthe cross (right) orXhelingam (far right) can also have a vast array ofsymbolic meanings. To the scientific mind, such phenomena as s)'mbolic ideas are a nuisance because they cannot be formulated in a way that is satis- factory to intellect and logic. They arc by no means the only case of this kind in psychology. The trouble begins ^vith the phenomenon of "affect" or emotion, which evades all the attempts of the psychologist to pin it dowm witli a final definition. The cause of the diffi- culty is the same in both cases -- tlie intcn'cn- tion of the unconscious. I know enough of the scientific point of view to understand that it is most annoying to have to deal \\'ith facts that cannot be com- pletely or adequately grasped. The trouble with these phenomena is that tlie facts are un- deniable and yet cannot be formulated in intellectual terms. For this one would have to be able to comprehend life itself, for it is life that produces emotions and s)Tnbolic ideas. The academic ps>'chologist is perfectly free to dismiss the phenomenon of emotion or the concept of the unconscious (or both) from his consideration. Yet they remain facts to which the medical ps)'chologist at least has to pay due attention; for emotional conflicts and the intcn'cntion of the unconscious arc the classical features of his science. If he treats a patient at all, he comes up against these irrationalities as hard facts, irrespective of his ability to formu- late them in intellectual terms. It is, therefore, quite natural that people who have not had the medical psychologist's experience find it diffi- cult to follow what happens when psychology ceases to be a tranquil pursuit for the scientist in his laboratory' and becomes an active part of the adventure of real life. Target practice on a shooting range is far from the battlefield ; the doctor has to deal ts'ith casualties in a genuine war. He must concern himself tvith psychic realities, even if he cannot embody them in scientific definitions. That is why no ^ textbook can teach psychology ; one learns only by actual experience. We can see this point clearly when ^ve c.xamine certain well-known sy'mbols : The cross in the Christian religion, for in- stance, is a meaningful symbol that expresses a multitude of aspects, ideas, and emotions; but a cross after a name on a list simply indi- cates that the individual is dead. The phallus functions as an all-embracing symbol in the Hindu religion, but if a street urchin dratvs one on a tvall, it just reflects an interest in his penis. Because infantile and adolescent fan- tasies often continue far into adult life, many dreams occur in which there are unmistakable sexual allusions. It ^vould be absurd to under- 9 ' stand them as anj'thing else. But when a mason speaks of monks and nuns to be laid upon each other, or an electrician of male plugs and female sockets, it would be ludicrous to suppose that he is indulging in glotving adoles- cent fantasies. He is simply using colorful descriptive names for his materials. When an educated Hindu talks to you about the Lin- gam (the phallus that represents the god Siva in Hindu mythology), you will hear things we Westerners would never connect with the penis. The Lingam is certainly not an obscene allusion; nor is the cross merely a sign of death. Much depends upon the maturity of the dreamer who produces such an image. Tlie interpretation of dreams and symbols demands intelligence. It cannot be turned into a mechanical system and then crammed into unimaginative brains. It demands both an increasing knowledge of the dreamer's indi- viduality and an increasing self-awareness on the part of tlie interpreter. No experienced worker in this field will deny that there are rules of thumb that can prove helpful, but they must be applied with prudence and intelligence. One may follow all the right rules and yet get bogged do^vn in the most appalling nonsense, simply by overlooking a seemingly unimportant detail that a better intelligence would not have missed. Even a man of high intellect can go badly astray for lack of intuition or feeling. When we attempt to understand symbols, we are not only confronted with the symbol itself, but we are brought up against the j wholeness of the symbol-producing individual. This includes a study of his cultural back- ground, and in the process one fills in many gaps in one's o\vn education. I have made it a rule myself to consider every case as an entirely new proposition about which I do not even know the ABC. Routine responses may be practical, and useful tvhile one is deal- ing \vith the surface, but as soon as one gets in touch with the vital problems, life itself takes over and even the most brilliant theoreti- cal premises become ineffectual words. Imagination and intuition are vital to our understanding. And though the usual popular opinion is that they are chiefly valuable to poets and artists (that in "sensible" matters one should mistrust them), they arc in fact equally vital in all the higher grades of science. Here they play an increasingly important role, ^vhich supplements that of the "rational" intellect and its application to a specific problem. Even physics, the strictest of all applied sciences, depends to an astonishing degree upon intui- tion, which ^vorks by ^vay of the unconscious (although it is possible to demonstrate after- ward the logical procedures that could have led one to the same result as intuition). Intuition is almost indispensable in the in- terpretation of symbols, and it can often ensure that they are immediately understood by the dreamer. But ^vhilc such a lucky hunch may be subjectively convincing, it can also be rather dangerous. It can so easily lead to a false feeling of security. It may, for instance, seduce both the interpreter and the dreamer into continuing a cosy and relatively easy relation, which may end in a sort of mutual dream. The safe basis of real intellectual knowledge and moral understanding gets lost if one is content with the vague satisfaction of having understood by "hunch." One can explain and know only if one has reduced intuitions to an exact knowledge of facts and their logical connections. An honest investigator ^vill have to admit that he cannot always do this, but it would be dishonest not to keep it always in mind. Even a scientist is a human being. So it is natural for him, like others, to hate the things he cannot explain. It is a common illusion to believ'c that what we know today is all ^vc ever can know. Nothing is more vulnerable than scientific theory, which is an ephemeral attempt to explain facts and not an everlasting truth in itself. Ancientmythological beingsare now curiosities inmuseums (right). Butthe archetypestheyexpressed have not lost theirpowerto affect men'sminds. Perhaps the monsters ofmodern "horror" films (farright) are distorted versions ofarchetypes that will no longerbe repressed. The role of symbols AVhcn the medical psycliologist takes an inter- est in s)Tnbols, he is primarily concerned \rith "rmtural" s\TnboIs, as distinct from "cultural" sNTnbols.^ The former arc derived from the unconscious contents of the psj-chc, and they therefore represent an enormous number of \-ariations on the essential archetj'pal images. In many eases they can still be traced back to their archaic roots -- i.c., to ideas and images that meet in the most ancient records and in primitive societies. Tlic cultural s\Tnbols, on the other hand, arc those that have been used to express "eternal tmtlis," and tliat arc still used in many religions. They have gone through many transformations and ct'cn a long process of more or less conscious development, and have thus become collective images accepted by civilized societies. Such cultural s^•mbols nevertheless retain much of their original numinosily or "spell." One is aware that they can evoke a deep emo- tional response in some indi%-iduals, and this ps)'chic charge makes them function in much the same tvay as prejudices. They arc a factor \vith ^^•hich the psychologist must reckon; it is follv to dismiss tliem because, in rational ..terms, they seem t_o.bc,^surd or irrclcyant.jrijcy..arc important constituents of our mental make-up _and_3.'itaLJQrccsJiLthc building up of human society ; and tlicy cannot be eradicated without seriousJoss-.,y' h ere they_..arc reprgsed or neg- Icctcd, thciti.5Pcdfic_cncrgv disappears inro~the unconscious \rith unaccountable consequences. The psychic energy- that appears to have been lost in this \vay in fact serves to rexive and in- tensify \vhatcvcr is uppermost in the uncon- scious -- tendencies, perhaps, that have liithcrto had no chance to express themselves or at least have not been allowed an uninhibited existence in our consciou.sncss. Such tendencies form an ever-present and potentially destructive "shadow" to our con- scious mind. Even tendencies that might in some circumstances be able to exert a beneficial influence arc transformed into demons when they arc repressed. This is ^^•hy many svcll- mcaning people arc understandably afraid of the unconscious, and incidentally of psxxholog)'. Our times have demonstrated what it means for the gates of the undcnvorld to be opened. Tilings ivhosc enormity nobody could have imagined in the idyllic harmlcssncss of the first decade of our century have happened and have turned our ivorld upside down. Ever since, the world has remained in a state of schizophrenia. Not only has chilizcd Germany disgorged its terrible primitivity, but Russia is also ruled by it, and Africa has been set on fire. No wonder that the Western world feels rnieasy. Modem man does not understand how much his "rationalism" (which has destroyed his capa- city to respond to numinous symbols and ideas) has put him at the mercy of the psychic "underu'orld." He has freed himself from "superstition" (or so he believes), but in the pro- cess he has lost his spiritual values to a positively dangerous degree. His moral and spiritual tradi- tion has disintegrated, and he is now paying i the price for this break-up in world-wide dis- orientation and dissociation. ' Anthropologists have often described what happens to a primitive society when its spiritual values are exposed to the impact of modem civilization. Its people lose the meaning of their lives, their social organization disintegrates, and they themselves morally decay. We are now in the same condition. But we have never really understood what we have lost, for our spiritual leaders unfortunately were more interested in protecting their institutions than in understand- ing the mystery that symbols present. In my opinion, faith does not exclude thought (which is man's strongest weapon), but unfortunately many believers seem to be so afraid of science (and incidentally of-psychology) that they turn a blind eye to the numinous psychic powers that forever control man's fate. We have strip- ped all things of their mystery and numinosity ; nothing is holy any longer. In earlier ages, as instinctive concepts welled up in the mind of man, his conscious mind could no doubt integrate them into a coherent psychic pattern. But the "civilized" man is no longer able to do this. His "advanced" con- sciousness has deprived itself of the means by which the auxiliary contributions of the in- stincts and the unconscious can be assimilated. These organs of assimilation and integration were numinous symbols, held holy by common consent. Today, for instance, we talk of "matter." We describe its physical properties. We conduct laboratory experiments to demonstrate some of its aspects. But the word "matter" remains a dry, inhuman, and purely intellectual concept, without any psychic significance for us. How different was the former image of matter -- the Great Mother -- that could encompass and ex- press the profound emotional meaning of L Mother Earth. In the same ^\'ay, what was the spirit is now identified %\-ith intellect and thus ceases to be the Father of AIL It has degen- erated to the limited ego-thoughts of man ; the immense emotional energy expressed in the image of "our Father" vanishes into the sand of an intellectual desert. These two archetj'pal principles lie at the foundation of the contrasting s^-stems of East and 'West. The masses and their leaders do not realize, hots'ever, that there is no substantial difference beUs'een calling the \vorld principle male and a father (spirit), as the 'West does, or female and a mother (matter), as the Com- munists do. Essentially, we kno^v as little of the one as of the other. In earlier times, these prin- ciples %vere \vorshiped in all sorts of rituals, %vhich at least showed the psychic significance they held for man. But now they have become mere abstract concepts. As scientific understanding has gro^\-n, so our world hasbecome dehumanized. Man feels him- self isolated in the cosmos, because he is no longer involved in nature and has lost his emo- tional "unconscious identity" ^sith natural phe- nomena. These have slowly lost their symbolic implications. Thunder is no longer the voice of an angry' god, nor is lightrung his avenging missile. No river contains a spirit, no tree is the life principle of a man, no snake the embodi- ment of wisdom, no mountain cave the home of a great demon. No voices now speak to man from stones, plants, and animals, nor does he speak to them belie^•ing they can hear. His contact with nature has gone, and with it has gone the profound emotional energ)' that this symbolic connection supplied. Repressedunconsciouscontentscan eruptdestructivelyintheform of negativeemotions -- as inWorldWar II. Far left.Jewish prisoners in Warsaw afterthe 1943 uprising ; left,footwearofthedead stacked atAuschwitz. Right,Australian aborigineswho have disintegrated sincethey lost theirreligious beliefsthrough contactwith civilization.Thistribe nownumbersonly afew hundred. This enormous loss is compensated for by the symbols of our dreams. They bring up our original nature -- its instincts and peculiar thinking. Unfortunately, hotvever, they express their contents in the language of nature, ^vhich is strange and incomprehensible to us. It there- fore confronts us tvith the task of translating it into the rational words and codcepts ofmodem speech, which has liberated itself from its primi- tive encumbrances -- notably from its mystical participation with the things its describes. Now- aday'S, when we talk of ghosts and other numi- nous figures, ^\'e are no longer conjuring them up. The power as ^vell as the glory is drained out of such once-potent tvords. '\Ve have ceased to belie^'e in magic formulas ; not many taboos and similar restrictions are left ; and our ^vorld seems to be disinfected of all such "supersti- tious" numina as 'Sntches, ^s'arlocks, and \yor- ricows," to say nothing of ^verewolves, vampires, bush souls, and all the other bizarre beings that populated the primeval forest. To be more aconite, the surface of our world seems to be cleansed of all superstitious and irrational elements. ^Vhether, however, the real inner human world (not our ts-ish-fulfilling fiction about it) is also freed from primitivity is another question. Is the number of 13 not still taboo for many people? Are there not still many individuals possessed by irrational preju- dices, projections, and childish illusions? A rea- listic picture of the human mind reveals many such primitive traits and survivals, which are still playing their roles just as if nothing had happened during the last 500 years. It is essential to appreciate this point. Modem man is in fact a curious mixture of characteris- tics acquired over the long ages of his mental development. This mixed-up being is the man and his symbols that we have to deal with, and we must scmtinize his mental products very carefully indeed. Skepticism and scientific con- viction exist in him side by side with old-fash- ioned prejudices, outdated habits of thought and feeling, obstinate misinterpretations, and blind ignorance. Such are the contemporary human beings who produce the symbols we psychologists in- vestigate. In order to explain these symbols and their meaning, it is vital to learn whether their representations are related to purely per- sonal experience, or whether they have been chosen by a dream for its particular purpose from a store of general conscious knowledge. Take, for instance, a dream in which the number 13 occurs. The question is whether the dreamer himself habitually believes in the un- lucky quality of the number, or whether the dream merely alludes to people who still in- dulge in such superstitions. The answer makes a great difference to the interpretation. In the former case, you have to reckon with the fact that the individual is still under the spell of the unlucky 13, and therefore will feel most un- comfortable in Room 13 in a hotel or sitting at a table with 13 people. In the latter case, 13 may n9t mean any more than a discourteous or abusive remark. The "superstitious" dre2imer still feels the "spell" of 13 ; the more "rational" dreamer has stripped 13 of its original emo- tional overtones. This argument illustrates the way in which archetypes appear in practical experience : They are, at the same time, both images and| J emotions. One can speak of an archetype only when these two aspects are simultaneous. When there is merely the image, then there is simply a word-picture of little consequence. But by being charged with emotion, the image gains numinosity (or psychic energy); it becomes dynamic, and consequences of some kind must flow from it. I am aware that it is difficult to grasp this concept, because I am trying to use words to describe something whose very nature makes it incapable of precise definition. But since so many people have chosen to treat archetypes as if they were part of a mechanical system that can be learned by rote, it is essential to insist that they are not mere names, or even philosophical concepts. They are pieces of life itself -- images that are integrally connected to the living individual by the bridge of the emotions. That is why it is impossible to give an arbitrary (or universal) interpretation of any archetype. It must be explained in the manner indicated by the whole life-situation of the par- ticular individual to whom it relates. Thus, in the case of a devout Christian, the symbol of the cross can be interpreted only in its Christian context -- unless the dream pro- duces a very strong reason to look beyond it. Even then, the specific Christian meaning should be kept in mind. But one cannot say that, at all times and in all circumstances, the symbol of the cross has the same meaning. If that were so, it would be stripped of its numin- osity, lose its vitality, and become a mere word. Those who do not realize the special feeling tone of the archetype end with nothing more than a jumble of mythological concepts, which can be strung together to show that everything means anything -- or nothing at all. All the corpses in the world are chemically identical, but living individuals are not. Archetypesjame to life onlyjvhenj5ne_^^ientlyJnesJp^di^qver_ why and in what fashion ,they,_are^meanm^Jl^ To"a living indiyiduah^. The mere use of words is futile when you do not know what they stand for. This is particu- larly true in psychology, where we speak of archetypes like the anima and animus, the wise The ancient Chineseconnected the moon withthegoddess Kwan-Yin (pictured above). Othersocieties have personifiedthemoonas a divinity.Andthough modern science shows usthatthemoon is really only a cratered ball of dirt (left), wehave retainedsomethingohhe archetypal attitude in ourfamiliar association ofthemoon with love andromance. J- 97 In a child's unconsciouswecan see thepower (and universality) of archetypal symbols.A seven-year- old's painting (left) -- a hugesun drivingaway black birds,demons ofthe night -- hasthe flavor of a true myth. Children at play (right) spontaneouslydance in as natural a form ofself-expression asthe ceremonial dances of primitives. Ancientfolklore still exists in children's "ritual" beliefs: For instance, children alloverBritain (and elsewhere) believe it is lucky to see a white horse -- which is a well-known symbol of life.A Celtic goddess of creativity, Epona,shown (far right) riding a horse,was often personified as a white mare. man, the great mother, and so on. You can know all about the saints, sages, prophets, and other godly men, and all the great mothers of the world. But if they are mere images whose numinosity you have never experienced, it will be as if you were talking in a dream, for you will not know what you are talking about. The mere words you use will be empty and valueless. They gain life and meaning only when you try to take into account their numinosity -- i.e., their relationship to the living individual. Only then do you begin to understand that their names mean very little, whereas the way they are related to you is all-important. The symbol-producing function of our dreams is thus an attempt to bring the original mind of man into "advanced" or differentiated consciousness, where it has never been before and where, therefore, it has never been sub- jected to critical self-reflection. For, in ages long past, that original mind was the whole of man's personality. As he developed consciousness, so his conscious mind lost contact with some of that primitive psychic energy. And the consci- ous mind has never known that original mind ; for it was discarded in the process of evolving the very differentiated consciousness that alone could be aware of it. ' Yet it seems that what we call the uncon- scious has preserved primitive chajactenstics that formed part of the original mind. It is to these characteristics that the symbols of dreams constantly refer, as if the unconscious sought to bring back all the old things from which the mind freed itself as it evolved -- ^illusions, fanta- sies, archaic thought forms, fundamental in- stincts, and so on. This is what explains the resistance, even fear, that people often experience in approach- ing unconscious matters. These relict contents are not merely neutral or indifferent. On the contrary, they are so highly charged that they are often more than merely uncomfortable. They can cause real fear. The more they are repressed, the more they spread through the whole personality in the form of a neurosis. It is this psychic energy that gives them such vital importance. It is just as if a man who has lived through a period of unconsciousness should suddenly realize that there is a gap in his memory -- that important events seem to have taken place that he cannot remember. In so far as he assumes that the psyche is an ex- clusively personal affair (and this is the usual assumption), he will try to retrieve the appar- ently lost infantile memories. But the gaps in his childhood memory are merely the symp- toms of a much greater loss -- the loss of the primitive psyche. As the evolution of the embryonic body re- peats its prehistory, so the mind also develops through a series of prehistoric stages. The main 1/ lOO Healing the split Our intellect has created a netv \s'orld that dominates nature, and has populated it wth monstrous machines. The latter are so indu- bitably useful that we cannot see e\'en a possi- bility of getting rid of them or our subservience to them. Man is boimd to foUo^v the adventur- ous promptings of his scientific and inventive mind and to admire himself for his splendid achievements. At the same time, his genius shows the uncarmy tendency to invent things that become more and more dangerous, be- cause they represent better and better means for wholesale suidde. In dew of the rapidly increasing avalanche of world population, man has already begun to seek wa)3 and means of keeping the rising flood at bay. But nature may antidpate all our attempts by turning against man his o\\ti cre- ative mind. The H-bomb, for instance, tsould put an effective stop to overpopulation. In spite of our proud domination of nature, we are still her dctims, for we have not even learned to control our own nature. Slotvly but, it appears, inevitably, tve are courting disaster. There are no longer any gods whom we can invoke to hdp us. The great reh'gions of the world suffer from increasing anemia, because the helpful numina have fled from the woods, rivers, and mountains, and from animals, and the god-men have disappeared undeiground into the imconscious. There tve fool oursdves Above left,the20th century's greatestcity -- NewYork. Below, theendofanother city -- Hiroshima, 1945.Thoughmanmayseem tohave gainedascendance over nature, Jungalwayspointed outthatman has notyetgained control over hisown nature. that they lead an ignominious existence among the relics of our past. Our present lives are dominated by the goddess Reason, tvho is our greatest and most tragic illusion. By the aid of reason, so we assure oursdves, we have "con- quered nature." But this is a mere slogan, for the so-called conquest of natime overwhelms us with the natural fact of overpopulation and adds to our troubles by our ps^'chological incapadty to make the necessary political arrangements. It remains quite natural for men to quarrd and to struggle for superiority over one another. How then have ^ve "conquered nature"? As any change must begin some^^'here, it is the single indiridual ^s'ho %s'ill experience it and caity' it through. The change must indeed be- gin %\ith an indiddual ; it might be any one of us. Nobody can afford to look round and to wait for somebody else to do what he is loath to do himself. But since nobody seems to know what to do, it might be ^vorth while for each of us to ask himself ^vhether by any chance his or her unconscious may know something that wiU hdp us. Certainly the consdous mind seems unable to do anj-thing useful in this respect. Man today is painfully aware of the fact that neither his great religions nor his various philo- sophies seem to prodde him ^sith those power- ful animating ideas that ^vould give him the seciuity he needs in face of the present condi- tion of the -svorld. I kno\v what the Buddhists would say: Things would go right if people would only follow the "noble dghtfold path" of the Dharma (doctrine, law) and had true insight into the Self. The Christian tells us that if only people had faith in God, we should have a better world. The rationalist insists that if people were intelligent and reasonable, all our problems would be manageable. The trouble is that none of them manages to solve these problems himself. lOI Christians often ask why God does not speak to them, as he is believed to have done in for- mer days. When I hear such questions, it always makes me think of the rabbi \vho was asked how it could be that God often showed himself to people in the olden days while nowadays nobody ever sees him. The rabbi replied : "Nowadays there is no longer anybody who can bow low enough." This answer hits the nail on the head. We are so captivated by and entangled in our sub- jective consciousness that we have forgotten the age-old fact that God speaks chiefly through dreams and visions. The Buddhist discards the world of unconscious fantasies as useless illu- sions; the Christian puts his Church and his Bible between himself and his unconscious; and the rational intellectual does not yet know that his consciousness is not his total psyche. This ignorance persists today in spite of the fact that for more than 70 years the uncon- scious has been a basic scientific concept that is indispensable to any serious psychological investigation. We can no longer afford to be so God- Almighty-like as to set ourselves up as judges of the merits or demerits of natural phenomena. We do not base our botany upon the old- fashioned division into useful and useless plants, or our zoology upon the naive distinction be- tween harmless and dangerous animals. But we still complacently assume that consciousness is sense and the unconscious is nonsense. In science such an assumption would be laughed out of court. Do microbes, for instance, make sense or nonsense? Whatever the unconscious may be, if is a natural phenomenon producing symbols that prove to be meaningful. We cannot expect someonewho has never looked through a micro- scope to be an authority on microbes; in the same way, no one who has not made a serious study of natural s^mibols can be considered a competent judge in this matter. But the general undervaluation of the human soul is so great that neither the great religions nor the philoso- phies nor scientific rationalism have been will- ing to look at it Uvice. In spite of the fact that the Catholic Church admits the occurrence of somnia a Deo missa (dreams sent by God), most of its tliinkcrs make no serious attempt to understand dreams. I doubt whether there is a Protestant treatise or doctrine that would stoop so low as to admit the possibility that the vox Dei might be per- ceived in a dream. But if a theologian really believes in God, by what authority does he suggest that God is imable to speak through dreams? I have spent more than half a century in investigating natural symbols, and I have come to the conclusion that dreams and their symbols are not stupid and meaningless. On the con- trary, dreams provide the most interesting in- formation for those who take the trouble to understand their symbols. The results, it is true, have little to do with such worldly concerns as buying and selling. But the meaning of life is not exhaustively explained by one's business life, nor is the deep desire of the human heart answered by a bank account. In a period of human history when all avail- able energy is spent in the investigation of ' nature, very little attention is paid to the essence of man, which is his psyche, although many researches aremade into its conscious functions. But the really complex and unfamiliar part of the mind, from which symbols are produced, is still virtually unexplored. It seems almost in- credible that though we receive signals from it every night, deciphering these communications seems too tedious for any but a very few people to be bothered with it. Man's greatest instru- ment, his psyche, is little thought of, and it is often directly mistrusted and despised. "It's only psychological" too often means : It is nothing. Where, exactly, does this immense prejudice come from? We have obviously been so busy with the question of what we think that we entirely forget to ask what the unconscious psyche tlunks about us. The ideas of Sigmund Freud confirmed for most people the existing contempt for the jjsyche. Before him it had been merely overlooked and neglected; it has now become a dump for moral refuse. This modem standpoint is surely one-sided and unjust. It does not even accord with the kno%vn facts. Our actual kno^vledge of the un- conscious shows that it is a natural phenomenon and that, like Nature herself, it is at least neutral. It contains aU aspects of human nature -- flight and dark, beautiful and ugly, good and evil, profound and silly. The study of individual, as ^vell as of collective, symbolism is an enor- mous task, and one that has not yet been mast- ered. But a beginning has been made at last. The early results are encouraging, and they seem to indicate an ans^ver to many so far un- ans^s'ered questions of present-day mankind. Above, Rembrandt'sP/?//osop/7er withanOpenBook (1 633).The inward-looking oldman providesan image ofJung's beliefthateach ofus mustexplore hisown unconscious. Theunconsciousmust notbe ignored ; it is as natural, as limitless,and as powerful asthe stars. 2 Ancient myths and modern man Joseph L. Henderson A ceremonial maskfromthe island ofNew Ireland (New Guinea) Ancient myths and modern man The eternal symbols The ancient history of man is being meaning- fully rediscovered today in the symbolic images and myths that have survived ancient man. As archaeologists dig deep into the past, it is not the events of historical time that we learn to treasure but the statues, designs, temples, and languages that tell of old beliefs. Other symbols are revealed to us by the philologists and reli- gions historians, who can translate these beliefs into intelligible modern concepts. These in turn are brought to life by the cultural anthropolo- gists. They can show that the same symbolic patterns can be found in the rituals or myths of small tribal societies still existing, unchanged for centuries, on the outskirts of civilization. All such researches have done much to cor- rect the one-sided attitude of thosemodem men who maintain that such symbols belong to the peoples of antiquity or to "backward" modern tribes and are therefore irrelevant to the com- plexities of modern life. In London or New York we may dismiss the fertility rites of Neo- lithic Man as archaic superstition. If anyone claims to have seen a vision or heard voices, he is not treated as a saint or as an oracle. It is said he is mentally disturbed. We read the myths of the ancien^ Greeks or the folk stories AmCT^an Indians, but we fail to see any connection betwpn them_and pur atStudSTo the,"heroes" or dramatic events of to^y. Yet the cpnnectipns are there. And the sym- bolsThat represent them have not lostjheir re- .levante for mankirid., One of the main contributions of our time to the understanding and revaluing of such eternal symbols has been made by Dr. Jung's School of Analytical Psychology. It has helped to break down the arbitrary distinction between 'pnmit^jnan, to_whom symbols seem a natural part of everyday life, and modem man, for whom symbols are apparently meaningless and Jrrelevant. As Dr. Jung has pointed out earlier in this book, the human mind has its own history and the psyche retains many traces left from previ- ous stages of its development. More than this, the contents of the unconscious exert a forma- tive influence on the psyche. Consciously we may ignore them, but unconsciously we respond to them, and to tlie syinbolic forms -- including dreams -- in which they express themselves. The indi\'idual may feel that his dreams are spontaneous and disconnected. But over a long period of time the analj-st can obser%'e a series of dream images and note that they have a meaningful pattern ; and by understanding this his patient may eventually acquire a new atti- tude to life. Some of the sj'mbols in such dreams derive from what Dr. Jung has called "the collective unconscious" -- that is, that part of the psyche ^vhich retains and transmits the common psychological inheritance of mankind. These sjTnbols are so ancient and unfamiliar to modem man that he cannot directly under- stand or assimilate them. It is here that the anal^-st can help. Possibly the patient must be freed from the encumbrance of symbols that have grown stale and inappro- priate. Or possibly he must be assisted to dis- cover the abiding value of an old s>'mbol that, far from being dead, is seeking to be reborn in modem form. Before the analyst can effectively explore the meaning of sjTnbols tvith a patient, he must himself acquire a ^vider knowledge of their origins and significance. For the analogies be- nveen ancient m)ths and the stories that appear in the dreams of modem patients are neither tri\'ial nor accidental. They exist because _the unconscious mind of modem man preser\'es the s^'mbol-making~^pacitv that once found ex- pression in the beliefs and riti^s of the primi- tiw. And that capacity still^pla^'s a role,of vital psychic importance._In rnore jvjq's than we re- alize, we are dependent on the m^ages that are carried by such ,symbols,_and both our atti- tudes and behavior are profoundly..influenced, by them. In wartime, for instance, one finds increased interest in the ^vorks of Homer, Shakespeare, or Tolstoi, and we read with a new understanding those passages that give war its enduring (or "archetypal") meaning. They evoke a response from us that is much more profound than it could be from someone who has never knowm the intense emotional experience of war. The battles on the plains of Troy were utterly un- like the fighting at Agincourt or Borodino, yet the great writers are able to transcend the ^tterences of time and place and expreis themes .th^t are univeliairTVe'r^pond because these themes are fundam^taJiy s>Tnbo]jc. A more striking example should be familiar to anyone who has grown up in a Christian society. At Christmas we may express our inner feeling for the mythological birth of a semi- Far left, a symbolicceremony of antiquity in 20th-centurYform :The American astronautJohn Glenn in aWashington parade after his orbit ofthe earth in 1962 -- like a hero of old, after a victory, returning home in a triumphal procession. Center left, a cross-like sculpture ofa Greek fertilitygoddess (c.2500 B.C.). Left,twoviews ofa 1 2th- centuryScotsstone cross that retainssome pagan femaleness : the "breasts" at the crossbar. Right,anotherage-old archetype reborn in anewguise : a Russian posterforan "atheistic" festival at Easter, to replacethe Christian festival -- ^just asthe Christian Easterwassuperimposedon earlier pagan solstice rites. divine child, even though we may not believe in the doctrine of the virgin birth of Christ or have any kind of conscious religious faith. Un- knowingly, we have fallen in with the symbol- ism of rebirth. This is a relic of an immensely older solstice festival, which carries the hope that the fading winter landscape of the northern hemisphere will be renewed. For all our sophis- tication we. find satisfaction in this symbolic festival, just as we join with our children at Easter in the pleasant ritual of Easter eggs and Easter rabbits. But do we understand what we do, or see the connection between the story of Christ's birth, death, and resurrection and the folk symbolism of Easter? Usually we do not even care to consider such things intellectually. Yet they complement each other. Christ's crucifixion on Good Friday seems at first sight to belong to the same pattern of fertility sym- bolism that one finds in the rituals of such other "saviors" as Osiris, Tammuz, Orpheus, and Balder. They, too, were of divine or semi-divine birth, they flourished, were killed, and were reborn. They belonged, in fact, to cyclic reli- gions in \vhich the death and rebirth of the god-king was an eternally recurring myth. But the resurrection of Christ on Easter Sun- day is much less satisfying from a ritual point of view than is the symbolism of the cyclic re- ligions. For Christ ascends to sit at the right hand of God the Father: His resurrection occurs once and for all. It is this finality of the Christian concept of the resurrection (the Christian idea of the Last Judgment has a similar "closed" theme) that distinguishes Christianity from other god-king myths. It happened once, and the ritual merely commemorates it. But this sense of finality is ^ robably one reason why early Christians, still influenced by pre-Christian traditions, felt that Christianity needed to be supplemented by some elements of an older fertility ritual. They needed the recurring promise of rebirth; and that is what is symbolized by the egg and the rabbit of Easter. I have taken t^vo quite different examples to show ho%v modem man continues to respond to profound psychic influences of a kind that, con- sciously, he dismisses as little more than the folk tales of superstitious and uneducated peoples. But it is necessary to go much further than this. The more closely one looks at the history of symbolism, and at the role that sym- a 13th-centuryJapanese scroll painting ofthe destruction ofa city ; below, similarlydominated byflame and smoke, St. Paul's Cathedral, London,during an air raid inWorldWar II. Methods of warfare havechangedoverthe ages, butthe emotional impactof war istimelessand archetypal. bols have played in the life of many different cultures, the more one understands that there is also a re-creative meaning in these symbols. Some symbols relate to childhood and the transition to adolescence, others to maturity, and others again to the experience of old age, when man is preparing for his inevitable death. Dr. Jung has described how the dreams of a girl of eight contained the symbols one normally associates \rith old age. Her dreams presented aspects of initiation into life as belonging to the same archet^-pal pattern as initiation into death. This progression of symbolic ideas may take place, therefore, witliin the unconscious mind of modem man just as it took place in the rituals of ancient societies. This crucial link bcUveen archaic or primitive myths and the symbols produced by the un- conscious is of immense practical importance to the analj'st. It enables him to identify and to interpret these symbols in a context that gives them historical perspective as well as psycholo- gical meaning. I shall now take some of the more important myths of antiquity and sho\\' how -- and to what purpose -- they are analo- gous to the symbolic material that we encoun- ter in our dreams. Top left, Christ's nativity ; center, hiscrucifixion ; bottom, hisascension. His birth, death,and rebirth follows the pattern ofmanyancienthero myths -- a pattern originallybasedon seasonal fertility rites likethose probablyheld3000yearsago at England'sStonehenge (seen below atdawn atthesummer solstice). Above,threeexamples ofthe tutelary orguardian figure thataccompanies the archetypal hero. Top, from Greek myth,the centaur Cheiron giving instructiontotheyouthful Achilles. Center, King Arthur's guardian,the magician Merlin (holding a scroll). Bottom, an instancefrom modern life : the traineronwhoseknowledgeand experience a professional boxer often depends. Most heroes mustfaceandovercome various monstersandforcesof evil. Top, the Scandinavian hero Sigurd (lowerright of picture) slaysthe serpent Fafnir. Center,theancient Babylonian epic heroGilgamesh battlingwith a lion. Bottom,the modernAmerican comic-strip hero Superman,whoseone-manwar againstcrime often requireshim to rescue pretty girls. Above,two examples ofthe hero's betrayal : the Biblical heroSamson (top), betrayedby Delilah ;and the Persian hero Rustam, led into a trap by aman he trusted. Below, a modern instance oihybris (over- confidence) : German prisoners in Stalingrad, 1941, after Hitler invaded Russia in winter. Ill and more comprehensive identity that supplies the strength that the personal ego lacks. Their special role suggests that the essential-junction of the herok myth is the development . .of_ the individual'sjegOHConsciousness -- his av^areness of his own strengths and w_eakn^es -- in_a.,mM- ner that will equip, him-for, the arduous tasks with which life confronts him. Once the indi- vidual has passed his initial test and can enter the mature phase of life, the hero myth loses its relevance. The hero's symbolic death becomes, as it were, the achievement of that maturity. I have so far been referring to the complete hero myth, in which the whole cycle from birth to death is elaborately described. But it is essen- tial to recognize that at each of the stages in this cycle there are special forms of the hero story that apply to the particular point reached by the individual in the development of his ego- consciousness, and to the specific problem con- fronting him at a given moment. That is to say, the image of the hero evolves in a manner that reflects each stage of the evolution of the human personality. This concept can be more easily understood if I present it in what amounts to a diagram. I take this example from the obscure North American tribe of Winnebago Indians, because it sets out quite clearly four distinct stages in the evolution of the hero. In these stories (which Dr. Paul Radin published in 1948 under the title Hero Cycles of the Winnebago) we can see the definite progression from the most primitive to the most sophisticated concept of the hero. This progression is characteristic of other hero' cycles. Though the symbolic figures in them naturally have different names, their roles are similar, and we shall understand them better once we have grasped the point made by this example. Dr. Radin noted four distinct cycles in the evolution of the hero myth. Henamed them the Trickster cycle, the Hare cycle, the Red Horn cycle, and the Tivin cycle. He correctly per- ceived the psychology of this evolution when he said : ""It represents our efforts to deal with the problem of growing up, aided by the illusion of an eternal fiction." The Trickster cycle corresponds to the earliest and least developed period of life. Trickster is a figure whose physical appetites dominate his behavior; he has the mentality of an infant. Lacking any purpose beyond the gratification of his primary needs, he is cruel, cynical, and unfeeling. (Our stories of Brer Rabbit or Rey- nard the Fox preserve the essentials of the Trickster myth.) This figure, which at the out- set assumes the form of an animal, passes from one mischievous exploit to another. But, as he does so, a change comes over him. At the end of his rogue's progress he is beginning to take on the physical likeness of a grown man. The next figure is Hare. He, like Trickster (whose animal traits are often represented among American Indians by a coyote), also first appears in animal form. He has not yet attained mature human stature, but all the same he appears as the founder of human culture -- the Transfonner. The 'Winnebago be- lieve that, in gi\'ingthem theirfamous Medicine Rite, he became their saHor as %vell as their culture-hero. This mjth was so po;\'erful, Dr. Radin tells us, that the members of the Peyote Rite were reluctant to give up Hare when Christianity began to penetrate the tribe. He became merged ^vith the figure of Christ, and some of them argued that they had no need of Christ since they already had Hare. This arche- tj-pal figure represents a distinct advance on Trickster: One can see that he is becoming a socialized being, correcting the instinctual and infantile urges found in the Trickster cycle. Red Horn, the third of this series of hero figures, is an ambiguous {jerson, said to be the youngest of 10 brothers. He meets the require- ments of an archet^'pal hero by passing such tests as ^sinning a race and by proving himself in battle. His superhmnan potver is showm by his ability to defeat giants by guile (in a game of dice) or by strength (in a wTestling match). He has a po^verful companion in the form of a thunderbird called "Storms-as-he-walks," whose strength compensates for tvhatever ^veakness Red Horn may display. With Red Horn we have reached the \s'orld of man, though an archaic world, in tvhich the aid of superhuman powers or tutelar)' gods is needed to ensure man's victory over the evil forces that beset him. Toward tlie end of the story the hero-god de- parts, lea\'ing Red Horn and his sons on earth. The danger to man's happiness and seciuity now comes from man himself. This basic theme (which is repeated in the last c)'cle, that of the Twins) raises, in effect, the vital question : Hotv long can human be- ings be successful without falling victims to their own pride or, in m)'thological terms, to the jealous)' of the gods? Though the Twins are said to be the sons of the Sun, they are essentially human and to- gether constitute a single person. Originally united in the mother's \vomb, they \vere forced apart at birth. Yet they belong together, and it is necessaty' -- though exceedingly difiicult -- to reunite them. In these two children we see the Uvo sides of man's nature. One of them. Flesh, is acquiescent, mild, and without initia- tive; the other, Stump, is d)'namic and rebel- lious. In some of the stories of the T^s'in Heroes these attitudes are refined to the point where one figure represents the introvert, ^vhose main strength lies in his potvers of reflection, and the other is an extravert, a man of action ^vho can accomplish great deeds. "Trickster" :the first, rudimentary stage in thedevelopmentofthe hero myth, in which the hero is instinctual, uninhibited,and often childish. Far left,the 1 6th-century Chinese epic hero Monkey,shown (in a modern Peking opera) tricking a riverking into giving upa magic staff. Left,on a sixth-century B.C. jar,the infant Hermesin his cradle afterhaving stolenApollo's cattle. Right,thetrouble-making Norsegod Loki (a 1 9th-century sculpture). Farright. Charlie Chaplincreating a disturbance in the 1936 filmModern Times -- a 20th-century trickster. II3 For a long time these two heroes are invin- cible : Whether they are presented as two sep- arate figures or as two-in-one, they carry all before them. Yet, like the warrior gods of Navaho Indian mythology, they eventually sicken from the abuse of theirown power. There are no monsters left in heaven or on earth for them to overcome, and their consequent wild behavior brings retribution in its train. The Winnebago say that nothing, in the end, was safe from them -- not even the supports on which the world rests. When the Twins killed one of the four animals that upheld the earth, they had overstgaped all limits and the tjme had come to put a stop to their career. The punish- ment they deserved was death. Thus, in both the Red Horn cycle and that of the Twins, we see the theme of sacrifice or death of the hero as a necessary cure for hybris, the pride that has over-reached itself. In the primitive societies whose levels of culture cor- respond to the Red Horn cycle, it appears that this danger may have been forestalled by the institution of propitiatory human sacrifice -- a theme that has immense symbolic importance and recurs continually in human history. The Winnebago, like the Iroquois and a few Algon- quin tribes, probably ate human flesh as a tote- mic ritual that could tame their individualistic and destructive impulses. In the examples of the hero's betrayal or de- feat that occur in European mythology, the theme of ritual sacrifice is more specifically em- ployed as a punishment for hybris. But the Winnebago, like the Navaho, do not go so far. Though the Twins erred, and though the punishment should have been death, they themselves became so frightened by their irre- sponsible power that they consented to live in a state of permanent rest : The conflicting sides of human nature were again in equilibrium, I have given this description of the four types of hero at some length because it provides a ciear deroDnstration of the pattern that occurs both in the historic myths and in the hero- dreams of contemporaryman. With this in mind we can examine the following dream of a middle-aged patient. The interpretation of this dream shows how the analytical psychologist can, from his knowledge of mythology, help his patient find an answer to what might otherwise seem an insoluble riddle. This man dreamed he was at a theatre, in the role of "an important spectator whose opinion is respected." There was an act in which a white monkey was stand- ing on a pedestal with men around him. In recounting this dream the man said : My guide explains the theme to me. It is the ordeal of a young sailor who is exposed both to Thesecond stage in the evolution ofthe hero isthefounder ofhuman culture. Left, a Navaho sand painting ofthe myth of Coyote,who stole firefrom thegodsand gave itto man. in Greekmyth Prometheus also stole firefromthegods forman -- forwhich hewas chained to a rock and tortured byan eagle (below, on a sixth-century B.c. cup). The hero in the third stage is a powerfulman-god -- like Buddha. In the first-centurysculpture above. Siddhanha beginsthejourneyon which he wiil receive enlightenment and become Buddha. Beiow left, a medieval Italian sculpture of Romulusand Remus, thetwins (raised by a wolf)who founded Rome -- andwho arethe best-known instance ofthe fourth stage ofthe hero myth. In thefourth stage,theTwins often misusetheirpower -- asdid the Roman heroes Castorand Pollux whentheyabductedthe daughters of Leucippus (below, in a painting bythe Flemish artist Rubens). the wind and to being beaten up. I begin to object that this white monkey is not a sailor at all; but just at that moment a young man in black stands up and I think that he must be the true hero. But another handsome young man strides toward an altar and stretches himself out on it. They are making marks on his bare chest as a preparation to offering him as a human sacrifice. Then I find myself on a platform with several other people. We could get down by a small ladder, but I hesitate to do so because there are two young toughs standing by and I think that they will stop us. But when a woman in the group uses the ladder unmolested, I see that it is safe and all of us follow the woman down. Now a dream of this kind cannot be quickly or simply interpreted. We have to unravel it carefully in order to show both its relation to the dreamer's own life and its wider symbolic implications. The patient who produced it was a man who had achieved maturity in a physical sense. He was successful in his career, and he had apparently done pretty well as a husband and father. Yet psychologically he was stUl immature, and had not completed his youthful phase of development. It was this psychic imma- turity that expresses itself in his dreams as differ- ent aspects of the hero myth. These images still exerted a strong attraction for his imagination even though they had long since exhausted any of their meaning in terms of the reality of his everyday life. Thus, in this dream, we see a series of figures theatrically presented as various aspects of a figure that the dreamer keeps expecting will turn out to be the true hero. The first is a white monkey, the second a sailor, the third a young man in black, and the last a "handsome young man." In the early part of the performance, which is supposed to represent the sailor's ordeal, the dreamer sees only the white mon- key. The man in black suddenly appears and as suddenly disappears; he is a new figure who first contrasts with the whitemonkey and is then for a moment confused with the hero proper. (Such confusion in dreams is not unusual. The dreamer is not usually presented with clear images by the unconscious. He has to puzzle out a meaning from a succession of contrasts and paradoxes.) Significantly, these figures appear in the course of a theatrical performance, and this context seems to be a direct reference by the dreamer to his own treatment by analysis : The "guide" he mentions is presumably his analyst. Yet he does not see himself as a patient who is being treated by a doctor but as "an important spectator whose opinion is respected." This is the vantage point from which he sees certain figures whom he associates to the experience of An individual psyche develops (as does the hero myth) from a primitive, childish stage -- and often images ofthe earlystagescan appear in the dreams of psychologically immature adults.The firststage might be represented bythe carefree play ofchildren -- likethe pillow fight (far left) from the 1933 French film Z6ro de Conduite.Thesecond stage might be the reckless thrill- seeking of earlyadolescence : Right American youths test their nerves in a speeding car.A laterstage producesthe idealismand self- sacrifice of late adolescence, at its highest during the 1956 revolt in Hungarywhenyoung rebelsfought tankswith crudeweapons or (far right) onlywith stones. growing up. The white monkey, for instance, reminds him of the plajtful and somewhat law- less beha^^or of boys between the ages of seven and 12. The sailor suggests the adventurousness of early adolescence, together ^vith the conse- quent punishment by "beating" for irrespon- sible pranks. The dreamer could offer no asso- ciation to the young man in black, but in the handsome young man about to be sacrificed he saw a reminder of the self-sacrificing idealism of late adolescence. At this stage it is possible to put together the historical material (or archetj-pal hero images) and the data from the dreamer's personal ex- perience in order to see how they corroborate, contradict, or qualify each other. The first conclusion is that the white monkey seems to represent Trickster -- or at least those traits of personality that the IVinnebago attri- bute to Trickster. But, to me, the monkey also stands for something that the dreamer has not personally and adequately experienced for him- self -- he in fact says that in the dream he was a spectator. I found out that as a boy he had been excessively attached to his parents, and that he was naturally introspective. For these reasons he had never fully developed the bois- terous qualities natural to late childhood ; nor had he joined in the games of his schoolfellows. He had not, as the saying goes, "got up to mon- key tricks" or practiced "monkey-shines." The saying provides the clue here. The monkey in the dream is in fact a symbolic form of the Trickster figure. But why should Trickster appear as a mon- key? And why should it be tvhite? As I have already pointed out, the AVinnebago myth tells us that, to\vard the end of the cycle. Trickster begins to emerge in the physical likeness of a man. And here, in the dream, is a monkey -- so close to a human being that it is a laughable and not too dangerous caricature of a man. The dreamer himself could offer no personal association that could explain tvhy the monkey was white. But from our knotvledge of primi- tive symbolism ^ve can conjecture that white- ness lends a special quality of "god-likeness" to this otherwise banal figure. (The albino is re- garded as sacred in many primitive communi- ties.) This fits in quite tvell with Trickster's semi-divine or semi-magical powers. Thus, it seems, the white monkey sjTnbolizes for the dreamer the positive quality of child- hood playfulness, which he had insufficiently accepted at the time, and tvhich he now feels called upon to exalt. As the dream tells us, he places it "on a pedestal," where it becomes something more than a lost childhood experi- ence. It is, for the adult man, a symbol of creative expcrimcntalism. Next we come to the confusion about the monkey. Is it a monkey, or is it a sailor who has to put up with beatings? The dreamer's own associations pointed to the meaning of this transformation. But in any case the next stage in human development is one in which the irre- sponsibility of childhood gives way to a period of socialization, and that involves submission to painful discipline. One could say, therefore, that the sailor is an advanced form of Trickster, who is being changed into a socially responsible person by means of an initiation ordeal. Draw- ing on the history of symbolism, we can assume that the wind represents the natural elements in this process, and the beatings are those which are humanly induced. At this point, then, we have a reference to the process that the Winnebago describe in the Hare cycle, where the culture-hero is a weak yet struggling figure, ready to sacrifice childish- ness for the sake of further development. Once again, in this phase of the dream, the patient is acknowledging his failure to experience to the full an important aspect of childhood and early adolescence. He missed out on the playfulness of the child, and also on the rather more ad- vanced pranks of the young teenager, and he is seeking ways in which those lost experiences and personal qualities can be rehabilitated. Next comes a curious change in the dream. The young man in black appears, and for a moment the dreamer feels that this is the "trae hero." That is all we are told about the man in black ; yet this fleeting glimpse introduces a theme of profound importance -- a theme that occurs frequently in dreams. This is the concept of the "shadow," which plays such a vital role in analytical psychology. Dr. Jung has pointed out that the shadow cast by the conscious mind of the individual con- tains the hidden, repressed, and unfavorable (or nefarious) aspects of the personality. But this darkness is not just the simple converse of the conscious ego. Just as the ego contains unfavor- able and destructive attitudes, so the shadow has good qualities -- normal instincts and creative impulses. Ego and shadow, indeed, although separate, are inextricably linked to- gether in much the same way that thought and feeling are related to each other. The ego, nevertheless, is in conflict with the shadow, in what Dr. Jung once called "the battle for deliverance." In the struggle of primitive man to achieve consciousness, this conflict is expressed by the contest between the archetypal hero and the cosmic powers of evil, personified by dragons and other monsters. In the developing consciousness of the individual the hero figure is the symbolic means by which the emerging ego overcomes the inertia of the unconscious mind, and liberates the mature The young, undifferentiated ego- personality is protected bythe mother -- a protection imaged by the sheltering Madonna, left (in a painting by the 1 5th-century Italian artist Piero della Francesca), orbythe Egyptianskygoddess Nut, right, bending overthe earth (in a fifth-century B.C. relief). Butthe egomusteventually free itselffrom unconsciousnessand immaturity ; and its "battle fordeliverance" is oftensymbolized bya hero's battle with a monster -- liketheJapanese god Susanoo's battlewith a serpent, above (from a 1 9th-century print). The hero doesn'talwayswin at once : For instance,Jonahwas swallowed bythewhale (far right, from a 14th-century manuscript). man from a regressive longing to return to the blissful state of infancy in a world dominated by his mother. Usually, in mythology, the hero wins his battle against the monster. (I shall say more about this in a moment.) But there are other hero myths in which the hero gives in to the monster. A familiar type is that of Jonah and the whale, in which the hero is swallowed by a sea monster that carries him on a night sea journey from west to east, thus symbolizing the supposed transit of the sun from sunset to dawn. The hero goes into darkness, which represents a kind of death. I have encountered this theme in dreams presented in my own clinical experience. The battle between the hero and the dragon is the more active form of this myth, and it shows more clearly the archetypal theme of the ego's triumph over regressive trends. For most people the dark or negative side of the person- ality remains unconscious. The hero, on the contrary, must realize that the shadow exists The ego'semergence can be symbolized notby a battle butby a sacrifice : death leading to rebirth. Revolution is sacrificial in thisway : Delacroix's painting (below), Greece expiringon the Ruins ofMissolonghi, personifiesthe country killed by civil warto be liberatedand reborn.As individual sacrifices : the British poet Byron (above) died in Greece during the revolution (1 824). Below left, the Christian martyr St. Lucia sacrificed hereyesand her life for her religion. and that he can draw strength from it. He must come to terms with its destructive powers if he is to become sufficiently terrible to overcome the dragon. I.c., before the ego can triumph, it must master and assimilate the shadow. One can sec this theme, incidentally, in a tvcll-known litcrar)' hero figure -- Goethe's char- acter of Faust. In accepting the wager of Mcphistophcles, Faust put himself in the potver of a "shadow" figure tliat Goethe describes as "part of Uiat power tvhich, willing eHl, finds the good." Like the man whose dream I have been discussing, Faust had failed to live out to the full an important part of his early life. He tvas, accordingly, an unreal or incomplete per- son tvho lost himself in a fruitless quest for metapln-sical goals that failed to materialize. He was still unwilling to accept life's challenge to live botli the good and the bad. It is to this aspect of the unconscious that the young man in black in my patient's dream seems to refer. Such a reminder of the shadow side of his personality, of its powerful potential and its role in preparing the hero for the strug- gles of life, is an essential transition from the earlier parts of tlte dream to the theme of the sacrificial hero : the handsome young man who places himself on an altar. Tin's figure repre- sents the form of heroism that is commonly associated to the ego-building process of late adolescence. A man expresses the ideal prin- ciples of his life at this time, sensing their potver both to transform himself and to change his re- lations with others. He is, so to speak, in the bloom of youth, attractive, full of energy and idealism. ^Vhy, then, does he willingly offer himself as a human sacrifice? The reason, presumably, is the same as that tvhich made the Twins of the Winnebago myth give up their power on pain of destruction. The idealism of youth, which drives one so hard, is bound to lead to over-confidence : Tlie human ego can be exalted to experience godlike attri- butes, but only at the cost of over-reaching itself and falling to dis.aster. (This is the meaning of the stop, of Icanu:, the youth who is carried Below, a montage ofWorldWar I a call-to-arms poster, infantry, a militarycemetery. Memorials and religious services tor soldierswho gave their lives tor theircountry often reflect the cyclic "death and rebirth"theme of the archet>'pal heroic sacrifice.An inscription onone British memorial to thedead ofWorldWar I reads "At the going down of thesun and in themorning we willrememberthem " n m>-thology. a hero's death is often due to his own hybns. which causes the gods to humble him. As a modern example: In 1912 the ship Titanic struck an iceberg and sank. (Right, a montage of scenes of the sinking, from the 1 943 film Titanic.) Yet the Titanic had been called "unsinkable" ; according to the American author Walter Lord, one sailor was heard to say, "God himself couldn't sink this ship I •'m Ml .SU ix i'l .f> C*¥.-' 3^^""m -jrV'jUr ' ;ssS up to heaven on his fragile, humanly contrived wings, but who flies too close to the sun and plunges to his doom.) All the same, the youth- ful ego must always run this risk, for if a young man does not strive for a higher goal than he can safely reach, he cannot surmount the ob- stacles between adolescence and maturity. So far, I have been talking about the con- clusions that, at the level of his personal asso- ciations, my patient could draw from his own dream. Yet there is an archetypal level of the dream -- ^the mystery of the proffered human sacrifice. It is precisely because it is a mystery that it is expressed in a ritual act that, in its symbolism, carries us a long way back into man's history. Here, as the man lies stretched out on an altar, we see a reference to an act even more primitive than those performed on the altar stone in the temple at Stonehenge. There, as on so many primitive altars, we can imagine a yearly solstice rite combined with the death and rebirth of a mythological hero. The ritual has a sorrow about it that is also a kind of joy, an inward acknowledgment that death also leads to a new life. Whether it is expressed in the prose epic of the Winnebago Indians, in a lament for the death of Balder in the Norse sagas, in Walt Whitman's poems of mourning for Abraham Lincoln, or in the dream ritual whereby a man returns to his Heroes often battle monsters to rescue" damsels in distress" (who symbolizethe anima). Left, St. George slays a dragon to free a maiden (in a 1 5th-century Italian painting). Right, in the 1916 film The GreatSecret, thedragon has become a locomotive butthe heroic rescue remainsthesame. youthful hopes and fears, it is the same theme -- the drama of netv birth through death. The end of the dream brings out a curious epilogue in which the dreamer at last becomes involved in the action of the dream. He and others are on a platform from which they have to descend.He does not trust the ladder because of the possible interference of hoodlums, but a ^voman encourages him to believe he can go down safely and this is accomplished. Since I found out from his associations that the whole performance he Mutnessed was part of his analysis -- a process of inner change that he was experiencing -- he was presumably thinking of the difficulty of getting back to ever}'day reality again. His fear of the "toughs," as he calls them, suggests his fear that the Trickster arche- type may appear in a collective form. The saving elements in the dream are the man-made ladder, which here is probably a symbol of the rational mind, and the presence of the woman who encourages the dreamer to use it. Her appearance in the final sequence of the dream points to a ps)'chic need to include a feminine principle as a complement to all this excessively masculine activity. It should not be assumed from what I have said, or from the fact that I have chosen to use the Winnebago myth to illuminate this particu- lar dream, that one must seek for complete and wholly mechanical parallels bet^veen a dream and the materials one can find in the history of mythology. Each dream is individual to the dreamer, and the precise form it takes is deter- mined by his own situation. What I have sought to sho^v is the manner in which the un- conscious draws on this archetypal material and modifies its patterns to the dreamer's needs. Thus, in this particular dream, one must not look for a direct reference to what the Winne- bago describe in the Red Horn or T\vin cycles ; the reference is rather to the essence of those two themes -- to the sacrificial element in them. As a general rule it can be said that the need for hero symbols arises when the ego needs strengthening -- when, that is to say, the con- scious mind needs assistance in some task that it cannot accomplish unaided or without draw- ing on the sources of strength that lie in the un- conscious mind. In the dream I have been dis- cussing, for instance, there was no reference to one of the more important aspects of the myth of the typical hero -- his capacity to save or protect beautiful ivomen from terrible danger. (The damsel in distress was a favorite myth of medieval Europe.) This is one ivay in which myths or dreams refer to the "anima" -- the feminine element of the male psyche that Goethe called "the Eternal Feminine." The nature and function of this female ele- ment will be discussed later in this book by Dr. von Franz. But its relation to the hero figure can be illustrated here by a dream produced by another patient, also a man of mature years. He began by saying : "I had returned from a long hike through India. A woman had equipped myself and a friend for the journey, and on my return I reproached her for failing to give us black rain- hats, telling her that through this oversight we had been soaked by the rain." This introduction to the dream, it later emerged, referred to a period in this man's youth when he ^vas given to taking "heroic" walks through dangerous mountain country in company with a college friend. (As he had never been to India, and in %'iew of Iiis own associations to tliis dream, I concluded that the dream joimiey signified his exploration of a new region -- not, that is to say, a real place but the realm of tlie unconscious.) In his dream the patient seems to feel that a ^voman -- presumably a personification of his anima -- has failed to prepare him properly for this expedition. The lack of a suitable rainhat suggests tliat he feels in an unprotected state of mind, in ^vliich he is imcomfortably affected by exposure to new and not altogether pleasant experiences. He believes that tlie -woman should have provided a rainhat for him, just as his mother proHded clotlies for him to \vear as a boy. This episode is reminiscent of his early picaresque wanderings, \vhen he ^vas sustained by tlie assumption that his mother (the original feminine image) would protect him against all dangers. As he grew older, he saw that this was a childish illusion, and he now blames his mis- fortune on hisown anima, not his mother. In the next stage of the dream the patient speaks of participating in a hike ivith a group of people. He gi'ows tired and returns to an out- door restaurant where he finds his raincoat, to- gether with the rainhat that he had missed earlier. He sits down to rest ; and, as he does so, he notices a poster stating that a local high- school boy is taking the part of Perseus in a play. Then the boy in question appears -- who turns out to be not a boy at all but a husky young man. He is dressed in grey with a black hat, and he sits dmra to talk with another youngman dressed in a black suit. Immediately after this scene the dreamer feels a new victor and finds that he is capable of rejoining his party. They all then climb over the next hill. There, beloiv them, he sees their destination ; it is a lovely harbor tonm. He feels both heartened and rejuvenated by the discover)c Here, in contrast to the restless, uncomfort- able, and lonely journey of the first episode, the dreamer is %s-ith a group. The contrast marks a change from an earlier pattern of isolation and youtliful protest to the socializing influence of a relation to others. Since this im- plies a new capacity for relatedness, it suggests that his anima must now be functioning better than it was before -- symbolized by his discov- er)' of the missing hat that the anima figure had pre\'iously failed to pro\'ide for him. But the dreamer is tired, and the scene at the restaurant reflects his need to look at his earlier attitudes in a new light, ^^'ith the hope of renewing his strength by this regression. And so it turns out. ^Vhat he first sees is a poster suggesting the enactment of a youthful hero role -- a high-school boy plajdng tlie part of Perseus. Then he sees the boy, noiv a man, is-itli a friend who makes a sharp contrast to him. The one dressed in light grey, the other in black, can be recognized, from is'hat I have prei-iously said, as a version of the Tis'ins. They arc hero-figures expressing the opposites of ego and alter-ego, which, however, appear here in a harmonious and unified relation. Tlic patient's associations confirmed this and emphasized that tlic figure in grc)- represents a well-adapted, worldly attitude to life, while the figure in black represents the spiritual life, in the sense that a elergs-man wears black. That they ^vorc hats (and he now had found his own) points to their having achieved a relatively mature identity of a kind that he had felt to be .severely lacking in his own earlier adolescent years, when the quality of "Trickstcrism" still clung to him, in spite of his idealistic self-image as a seeker of ss-isdom. His association to the Greek hero Perseus svas a curious one. which proved especially sig- nificant because it revealed a glaring inaccu- racy. It turned out that he thought Perseus was the hero who slew the Minotaur and rcsaicd Ariadne from the Cretan labyrinth. As he wrote the name down for me, he dl'covcrcd his mis- take -- that it was Theseus, not Perseus, who slew the Minotaur -- and this ml'takc became .suddenly meaningful, as such slips often do, by making him notice what these two heroes had in common. They Ixith had to overcome their fear of unconscious demonic maternal powers and had to liberate from these powers a single youthful feminine figure. Perseus had to cut off the head of the gorgon Medusa, whose horrifying visage and snaky locks turned all who gazed upon them to stone. He later had to overcome the dragon that guarded Andromeda. Theseus represented the young patriarchal spirit of .Athens who had to brave the terrors of the Cretan labyrinth with its monstrous inmate, the Minotaur, which per- haps svmbolizcd the unhealthy decadence of matriarchal Crete. (In all cultures, the laby- rinth has the meaning of an entangling and confusing representation of the world of matri- archal consciousness; it can be traversed only by those who are ready for a special initiation into the m\-stcrious world of the collective un- coascious.) Having overcome tliis danger, Theseus rescued Ariadne, a maiden in distress. Tliis rescue symbolizes the liberation of the anima figure from the devouring aspect of the mother image. Not until this is accomplished can a man achieve his first tnic capacity for rclatcdncss to women. Tlie fact that this man had failed adequately to separate the anima from the mother was emphasized in another drctim, in which he encountered a dragon -- a sj'tnbolic image for the "devouring" aspect of his attachment to his mother. This dragon pur- sued him, and because he had no weapon he began to get the worst of the stniggle. Significantly, however, his tvife appeared in the dream, and her appearance somehow made the dragon smaller and less threatening. Tliis change in the dream showed that in his mar- riage the dreamer was belatedly overcoming Some heroic battlesand rescues from Greek myth : Far left, Perseus slays Medusa (on a sixth-century B.C.vase) ; left, Perseuswith Andromeda (from a first-century B.c. mural)v.'homhesavedfromamonster. Right.Theseus killsthe Minotaur (on a first-centuryB.Cjar) watched byAriadne ;below,on a Cretan coin (67 B.C.). the Minotaur's labyrinth. the attachment to his mother. In other words, hero archet^TJe represents ; he had clarified and he had to find a "means of freeing the psychic developed that part of him tvhich tvas s^Tnbol- energy attached to the mother-son relationship, ized by the woman ; and he had, by his ego's in order to achieve a more adult relation to heroic act, liberated himself from his mother, women -- and, indeed, to adult society as a These and many other examples of the hero whole. The hero-dragon battle was the symbolic myth in modem dreams show that the ego as expression of this process of "grotving up." hero is altvays essentially a bearer of culture But the hero's task has an aim that goes rather than a purely egocentric exhibitionist, beyond biological and marital adjustment. It is Even Trickster, in his misguided or unpurposive to liberate the anima as that inner component 'vay, is a contributor to the cosmos as primitive of the psyche %vhich is necessary for any true man sees it. In Navaho mythology, as Coyote, creative achievement. In this man's case we he hurled the stars into the sky as an act of have to guess the probability of this outcome creation, he invented the necessary contingency because it is not directly stated in the dream of of death, and in the myth of emergence he the Indian journey. But I am sure he would helped lead the people through the hollow reed confirmmy hypothesis that his journey over the whereby they escaped from one ^vorld to an- hill and the sight of his goal as a peaceful har- other above it where they were safe from the bor town contained the rich promise that he threat of flood. would discover his authentic anima fimction. We have here a reference to that form of He ^vould thus be cured of his early resentment creative evolution which evidently begins on a at not being given protection (the rainhat) by childlike, preconscious, or animal level of exist- the %voman for his journey through India. (In ence. The ego's rise to effective conscious action dreams, significantly placed to\vns can often be becomes plain in the true culture-hero. In the anima symbob.) same fashion the childbh or adolescent ego frees The man had won thb prombe of security itself from the oppression of parental expecta- for himself by hb contact with the authentic tions and becomes individual. As part of thb hero archetype, and had found a netv co-opera- rise to consciousness the hero-dragon battle may tive and related attitude to the group. Hb sense have to be fought and refought to liberate of rejuvenation naturally followed. He had energy for the multitude of human tasks that dra^vn on the inner source of strength that the can form a culture pattern out of chaos. When this is successful, we see the full hero image emerging as a kind of ego strength (or, if we are speaking in collective terms, a tribal identity) that has no further need to overcome the monsters and the giants. It has reached the point where these deep forces can be person- alized. The "feminine element" no longer ap- pears in dreams as a dragon, but as a woman; similarly, the "shadow" side of the personality takes on a less menacing form. This important point is illustrated in the dream of a man nearing 50. All his life he had suffered from periodic attacks of anxiety asso- ciated with fear of failure (originally engen- dered by a doubting mother). Yet his actual achievements, both in his profession and in his personal relations, were weU above average. In his dream his nine-year-old son appeared as a young man of about 18 or 19, dressed in the shining armor of a medieval knight. The young man is called upon to fight a host of men in black, which he prepares at first to do. Then he suddenly removes his helmet, and smiles at the leader of the menacing host; it is clear that they will not engage in the battle but will become friends. The son in the dream is the man's own youthful ego, which had frequently felt threat- ened by the shadow in the form of self-doubt. He had, in a sense, waged a successful crusade against this adversary all his mature life. Now, partly through the actual encouragement of seeing his son grow up without such doubts, but mainly by forming a suitable image of the hero in the form closest to his own environmental pattern, he finds it no longer necessary to fight the shadow ; he can accept it. That is what is symbolized in the act of friendship. He is no longer driven to a competitive struggle for indi- vidual supremacy, but is assimilated to the cul- tural task of forming a democratic sort of com- munity. Such a conclusion, reached in the full- ness of life, goes beyond the heroic task and leads one to a truly mature attitude. This change, however, does not take place automatically. It requires a period of transition, which is expressed in the various forms of the archetype of initiation. The archetype of initiation In a psychological sense the hero image is not to be regarded as identical with the ego proper. It is better described as the symbolic means by which the ego separates itself from the arche- types evoked by the parental images in early childhood. Dr. Jung has suggested that each human being has originally a feeling of whole- ness, a powerful and complete sense of the Self. And from the Self -- the totality of the psyche -- the individualized ego-consciousness emerges as the individual grows up. Within the past few years, the works of certain followers of Jung have begun to docu- ment the series of events by which the indi- vidual ego emerges during the transition from infancy through childhood. This separation can never become final without severe injury to the original sense of wholeness. And the ego must continually return to re-establish its relation to the Self in order to maintain a condition of psychic health. It ^vould appear from my studies that the hero myth is the first stage in the differentia- tion of the psyche. I have suggested that it seems to go through a fourfold cycle by which the ego seeks to achieve its relative autonomy from the original condition of wholeness. Unless some degree of autonomy is achieved, the indi- vidual is imable to relate himself to his adult environment. But the hero myth does not ensure that this liberation ^vill occur. It only sho^vs ho\v it is possible for it to occur, so that the ego may achieve consciousness. There re- mains the problem of maintaining and develop- ing that consciousness in a meaningful way, so that the indiwdual can live a useful life and can achieve the necessary sense of self-distinc- tion in society. Ancient history and the rituals of contem- porary primitive societies have provided us with a wealth of material about myths and rites of initiation, whereby young men and women are weaned a^vay from their parents and forcibly made members of their clan or tribe. But in making this break with the childhood 'world, the original parent archetype wiU be injured, and the damage must be made good by a heal- ing process of assimilation into the life of the group. (The identity of the group and the indi- vidual is often symbolized by a totem animal.) Thus the group fulfills the claims of the injured archetype and becomes a kind of second parent to which the young are first symbolically sacri- ficed, only to re-emerge into a new fife. In this "drastic ceremony, which looks very like a sacrifice to the porvers that might hold the young man back," as Dr. Jimg has put it. A primitive tribe'stotem (oftenan animal) symbolizeseach tribesman's identitywith the tribal unit. Left, anAustralian aborigine imitating (in a ritual dance) histribe'stotem -- anemu. Manymoderngroups usetotem-like animals asemblems : Below, a heraldic (ion (fromthe Belgian coatofarms) on a 17th- century allegoricalmapof Belgium. Right,thefalcon isthemascotof theAmerican Air ForceAcademy's footballteam. Farright modern totemisticemblems thataren't animals : ashopwindowdisplay of ties, badges, etc. of British schoolsand clubs. we see how the power of the original archetype can never be permanently overcome, in the manner envisaged by the hero-dragon battle, without a crippling sense of alienation from tlie fruitful powers of the unconscious. We saw in the myth of the Twins how their hybris, ex- pressing excessive ego-Self separation, was cor- rected by their own fear of the consequences, which forced them back into a harmonious ego- Self relation. In tribal societies it is the initiation rite that most effectively solves this problem. The ritual takes the novice back to the deepest level of original mother-child identity or ego-Self iden- tity, thus forcing him to experience a symbolic death. In other words, his identity is tempo- rarily dismembered or dissolved in the collective unconscious. From this state he is then cere- monially rescued by the rite of the new birth. This is the first act of true consolidation of the ego with the larger group, expressed as totem, clan, or tribe, or all three combined. The ritual, whether it is found in tribal groups or in more complex societies, invariably insists upon this rite of death and rebirth, which provides the novice with a "rite of passage" from one stage of life to the next, whether it is from early childhood to later childhood or from early to late adolescence and from then to maturity. Initiatory events are not, of course, confined to the psychology'' of youth. Every new phase of development throughout an individual's life is accompanied by a repetition of the original conflict beUveen the claims of the Self and the claims of the ego. In fact, this conflict may be expressed more po\s'erfulIy at the period of transition from early maturity to middle age (between 35 and 40 in our society) than at any other time in life. And the transition from middle age to old age creates again the need for affirmation of the difference behveen the ego and the total psyche; the hero receives his last call to action in defense of ego-conscious- ness against the approaching dissolution of life in death. At these critical periods, the archety'pe of initiation is strongly activated to prowde a meaningful transition that offers something more spiritually satisfying than the adolescent rites ^vith their strong secular flavor. Tlie arche- ty-pal patterns of initiation in this religious sense -- knouTi since ancient times as "the my'steries" -- are ^voven into the texture of all ecclesiastical rituals requiring a special manner of worship at the time of birth, marriage, or death. As in our study of the hero myth, so in the study of initiation we must look for examples in the subjective experiences of modem people and especially of those who have undergone analysis. It is not surprising that there should appear, in the unconscious of someone who is seeking help from a doctor specializing in psychic disorders, images that duplicate the major patterns of initiation as ^ve knorv them from history. Perhaps the commonest of these themes to be found in young people is the ordeal, or trial of strength. This might seem to be identical ^vith what we have already noticed in modem dreams illustrating the hero myth, such as the sailor who had to submit to the ^veather and to beatings, or that proof of fitness represented in the hike through India of the man without a rainhat. AVe can also see this theme of physical suffering carried to its logical end in the first dream I discussed, when the handsome young man became a human sacrifice on an altar. This sacrifice resembled the approach to initia- tion, but its end ^vas obscured. It seemed to round off the hero cycle, to make ^vay for a new theme. There is one striking difference beUveen the hero m>'th and the initiation rite. The t)'pical hero figures exhaust their efforts in achieving the goal of their ambitions; in short, they become successful even if immediately after- ward they are punished or killed for their hybris. In contrast to this, the no\'ice for initia- tion is called upon to give up \villful ambition Primitive initiation rituals bring the youth into adulthood and into the tribe's collective identity. In many primitive societies, initiation is accompanied by circumcision (a symbolic sacrifice). Here are four stages in a circumcision rite of Australian aborigines. Far left and center; The boys are placed under blankets (a symbolic death from which they will be reborn). Bottom, they are removed and held by the men for the actual operation. Left, the circumcised boys are given men's conical caps, a mark of their new status. Right, they are finally isolated from the tribe to be purified and given instruction. and all desire and to submit to the ordeal. He must be willing to experience this trial \vdthout hope of success. In fact, he must be prepared to die ; and though the token of his ordeal may be mild (a period of fasting, the knocking out of a tooth, or tattooing) or agonizing (the inflic- tion of the wounds of circumcision, subinciaon, or other mutilations), the purpose remains al^vays the same : to create the symbolic mood of death from ^vhich may spring the symbolic mood of rebirth. A young man of 25 dreamed of climbing a mountain on top of which there ^vas a kind of altar. Near the altar he sees a sarcophagus with a statue of lumself upon it. Then a veiled priest approaches carrying a staff on which there glows a living sun-disk. (Discussing the dream later, the yoimg man said that climbing a mountain reminded him of the effort he was making in his analysis to achieve self-mastery.) To his surprise, he finds himself, as it were, dead, and instead of a sense of achievement he feels deprivation and fear. Then comes a feeling of strength and rejuvenation as he is bathed in the rvarm rays of the sun-disk. This dream shows quite succinctly the dis- tinction tve must make beris'een initiation and the hero m^th. The act of climbing the moun- tain seems to suggest a trial of strength : It is the rvill to achieve ego-consciousness in the heroic phase of adolescent development. The patient had evidently thought that his approach to therapy would be like his approach to other tests of manhood, which he had approached in the competitive manner characteristic of yotmg men in our society. But the scene by the altar corrected this mistaken assumption, shoudng him that his task is rather to submit to a power greater than himself. He must see himself as if he were dead and entombed in a symbolic form (the sarcophagus) that recalls the archetypal mother as the original container of all life. Only by such an act of submission can he experience rebirth. An invigorating ritual brings him to life again as the sjunbolic son of a Sun Father. Here again we might confuse this with a hero cycle -- that of the Twtiis, the "children of the Sun." But in this case we have no indication that the initiate -will over-reach himself. Instead, he has learned a lesson in humility by e.xperi- encing a rite of death and rebirth that marks his passage from youth to maturity. According to his chronological age he should already have made this transition, but a pro- longed period of arrested development has held him back. This delay had plimged him into a neurosis for which he had come for treatment, and the dream offers him the same wise counsel that he could have been given by any good tribal medicine man -- ^that he should give up scaling mountains to prove his strength and submit to the meaningful ritual of an initiatory change that could fit him for the new moral responsibilities of manhood. The theme of submission as an essential attitude toward promotion of the successful initiation rite can be clearly seen in the case of girls or women. Their rite of passage initially emphasizes their essential passivity, and this is reinforced by the physiological limitation on their autonomy imposed by the menstrual cycle. It has been suggested that the menstrual cycle may actually be the major part of initiation from a woman's point of view, since it has the power to awaken the deepest sense of obedience to life's creative potver over her. Thus she tvill- ingly gives herself to her tvomanly function, much as a man gives himself to his assigned role in the coimnunity life of his group. On the other hand, the ivoman, no less than the man, has her initial trials of strength that Asarcophagusfromsecond-century AD.Thebesthatreveals a symbolic connectionwith the archetypal Great Mother (thecontainerofalllife). The inside ofthecoverbears a portrait ofthe Egyptian goddess Nut: thusthegoddesswould"embrace thebody ofthedeceased (whose portrait ison the base,far right). be dominate him in the same way tlicsc mothers had dominated their children? In his dream he tvas engaged in a ritual dance along with another man and ttvo other women, one of whom ts-as his fiancee. The oUiers were an older man and wife, tvho im- pressed the dreamer because, despite their close- ness to each other, they seemed to have room for their indis'idual difTcrcnces, and did not appear to be possessive. Tlicse t^vo therefore represented to thus young man a married state that did not impose undue constraint on the development of the individual nature of the two partners. If it were possible for him to achieve this condition, marriage would then become accept.ablc to him. In the ritual dance each m.an faced his woman p.artner, and all four took their places at the comers of a square dancing ground. As tliev' danced, it became app.arcnt that this was also a kind of sword d.ancc. Each d.mccr had in his hand a short s\vord with whicli to per- form a difTicult arabesque, moving arms and legs in a series of movements that suggested alternate impulses of aggression and .submission to each other. In the final scene of the dance all four dancers had to plunge the swords into their own breasts and die. Only tlic dreamer refti.scd to accomplish the final suicide, and was left standing alone after the others had fallen. He felt deeply ashamed of his cosvardly failure to sacrifice himself witli the others. This dream brought home to my patient the fact that he was more than ready to change his attitude to life. He had been self-centered, seeking the illusoiy- safety of personal indepen- dence but inwardly dominated by the fears caused by childhood subjection to his mother. He needed a challenge to his manhood in order to see that unless he sacrificed his childish state of mind he would be left isolated and ashamed. The dream, and his subsequent insight into its meaning, dispelled his doubts. He had passed through the symbolic rite by which a young' man gives up his exclusive autonomy and accepts his shared life in a related, not just heroic, fomi. And so he married and found appropriate fulfillment in his relationship with his wife Far from impairing his elTectivencss in the world, his marriage actually enhanced it. Quite apart from the neurotic fear that invisible mothers or fathers may be lurking behind the marriage veil, even the normal young man has good reason to feel apprclien- sivc about the wedding ritual. It Is essentially a woman's initiation rite, in which a man is bound to feel like anything but a conquering hero. No wonder we find, in tribal societies, such counterphobic rituals as the abduction or rape of the bride. These enable the man to cling to the remnants of his heroic role at the very moment that he must submit to his bride and assume the responsibilities of marriage. But the theme of marriage is an image of such universality that it also has a deeper mean- ing. It is an acceptable, even necessary, sym- bolic discovery of the feminine component of a man's own psyche, just as much as it is the acquisition of a real wife. So one may encoun- ter this archetype in a man of any age in response to a suitable stimulus. Not all women, however, react trustingly to the married state. A woman patient who had unfulfilled longings for a career, which she had had to give up for a very difficult and short- lived marriage, dreamed that she was kneeling opposite a man who was also kneeling. He had a ring that he prepared to put on her finger, but she stretched out her right-hand ring finger in a tense manner -- evidently resisting this ritual of marital union. It was easy to point out her significant error. Instead of offering the left-hand ring finger (by which she could accept a balanced and natural relation to the masculine principle) she had wrongly assumed that she had to put her entire conscious (i.e., right-sided) identity in the ser- vice of the man. In fact, marriage required her to share with him only that subliming, natural (i.e., left-sided) part of herself in which the principle of union would have a symbolic, not a literal or absolute meaning. Her fear was the fear of the woman who dreads to lose her identity in a strongly patriarchal marriage, which this woman had good reason to resist. Nevertheless, the sacred marriage as an archetypal form has a particularly important meaning for the psychology of women, and one for which they are prepared during their ado- lescence by many preliminary events of an initiatory character. The archetypal sacred marriage (the union ofopposites, ofthemaleand female principles) represented here by a 1 9th-century Indian sculpture ofthe deities Siva and Parvati. J .i .J Beauty and the Beast Girls in our society share in the masculine hero mjths because, like boys, they must also de- velop a reliable ego-identity and acquire an education. But there is an older layer of the mind that seems to come to the surface in then- feelings, wth the aim of making them into women, not into imitation men. When this ancient content of the psyche begins to make its appearance, the modem young woman may repress it because it threatens to cut her off from the emancipated equality of friendship and opportunity to compete with men that have become her modem privileges. This repression may be so successful that for a time she will maintain an identification wth the masculine intellectual goals she learned at school or college. Even when she marries, she wiU preserve some illusion of freedom, despite her ostensible act of submission to the archetype of marriage -- with its implicit injunction to become a mother. And so there may occur, as we very frequently see today, that conflict which in the end forces the \voman to redis- cover her bmied \\'omanhood in a painful (but ultimately rewarding) manner. I saw an example of this in a young married woman who did not yet have any children but who intended to have one or two eventually, because it would be expected of her. Mean- while her sexual response was unsatisfactory. This worried her and her husband, though they were unable to offer any explanation for it. She had graduated Avith honors from a good woman's college and enjoyed a life of intellec- tual companionship with her husband and other men. While this side of her life went well enough much of the time, she had occasional outbursts of temper and talked in an aggressive fashion that alienated men and gave her an in- tolerable feeling of dissatisfaction wth herself. She had a dream at this time that seemed so important she sought professional ad\'ice to imderstand it. She dreamed she was in a line of young ^vomen like herself, and as she looked ahead to where they were gomg she saw that as each came to the head of the line she -was de- capitated by a guillotine. Without any fear the dreamer remained in the line, presumably quite willing to submit to the same treatment when her turn came. I explained to her that this meant she tvas ready to give up the habit of "hving in her head" ; she must learn to free her body to dis- cover its natural sexual response and the fulfill- ment of its biological role in motherhood. The dream expressed this as the need to make a drastic change ; she had to sacrifice the "mascu- line" hero role. As one might expect, this educated woman had no difficulty in accepting this interpretation at an intellectual level, and she set about trying to change herseK into a more submissive kind of woman. She did then improve her love-life and became the mother of two very satisfactory children. As she grew to knots' herself better, she began to see that for a man (or the mascu- line-trained mind in women) life is something that has to be taken by storm, as an act of the heroic uill ; but for awoman to feel right about herself, life is best realized by a process of awakening. A universal myth expressing this kind of awakening is found in the fairy tale of Beauty and the Beast. The best kno^v•n version of this story relates ho\v Beauty, the youngest of four daughters, becomes her father's favorite because of her unselfish goodness. When she asks her father only for a %vhite rose, instead of the more costiy presents demanded by the others, she is aware only of her inner sincerity of feeling. She does not kno^v that she is about to endanger her fatheris life and her ideal relation %vith him. For he steals the %vhite rose from the enchanted garden of Beast, who is stirred to anger by the theft and requires him to return in three months for his punishment, presumably death. I / (In allowing the father this reprieve to go home with his gift, Beast behaves out of char- acter, especially when he also offers to send him a trunk full of gold when he gets home. As Beauty's father comments, the Beast seems cfuel and kind at the same time.) Beauty insists upon taking her father's pun- ishment and returns after three months to the enchanted castle. There she is given a beautiful room where she has no worries and nothing to fear except the occasional visits of Beast, who repeatedly comes to ask her if she will someday marry him. She always refuses. Then, seeing in a magic mirror a picture of her father lying ill, she begs Beast to allow her to return to comfort him, promising to return in a week. Beast tells her that he will die if she deserts him, but she may go for a week. At home, her radiant presence brings joy to her father and envy to her sisters, who plot to detain her longer than her promised stay. At length she dreams that Beast is dying of despair. So, realizing she has overstayed her time, she returns to resuscitate him. Quite forgetting the dying Beast's ugliness, Beauty ministers to him. He tells her that he was unable to live without her, and that he will die happy now that she has returned. But Beauty realizes that she cannot live without Beast, that she has fallen in love with him. She tells him so, and promises to be his wife if only he will not die. At this the castle is filled with a blaze of light and the sound of music, and Beast disappears. In his place stands a handsome prince, who tells Beauty that he had been enchanted by a witch and turned into the Beast. The spell was ordained to last until a beautiful girl should love Beast for his goodness alone. In this story, ifwe unravel the symbolism, we are likely to see that Beauty is any young girl or woman who has entered into an emotional bond with her father, no less binding because of its spiritual nature. Her goodness is symbol- ized by her request for a white rose, but in a significant twist of meaning her unconscious intention puts her father and then herself in the power of a principle that expresses not goodness alone, but cruelty and kindness com- bined. It is as if she wished to be rescued from a love holding her to an exclusively virtuous and unreal attitude. By learning to love Beast she awakens to the power of human love concealed in its animal (and therefore imperfect) but genuinely erotic form. Presumably this represents an awakening of her true function of relatedness, enabling her to accept the erotic component of her original wish, which had to be repressed because of a fear of incest. To leave her father she had, as it were, to accept the incest-fear, to allow her- self to live in its presence in fantasy until she could get to know the animal man and discover her own true response to it as a woman. Threescenesfrom the 1946 film of BeautyandtheBeast (directed by France'sJean Cocteau) : Left, Beauty'sfathercaught stealing the white rosefrom the Beast's garden; right, the Beastdying ; farright, the Beasttransformed into a Prince, walking with Beauty.Thestorycan be said tosymbolize ayoung girl's initiation -- i.e., herreleasefrom herbond with the father, in order tocome totermswith the erotic animal side of her nature. Until this isdone,she cannot achieve a true relationship with a man. In this way she redeems herself and her image of the masculine from the forces of re- pression, bringing to consciousness her capacity to trust her love as something that combines spirit and nature in the best sense of the words. A dream of an emancipated woman patient of mine represented this need to remove the incest-fear, a very real fear in this patient's thoughts, because of her father's over-close attachment to her follo\\dng his ^s'ife's death. The dream showed her being chased by a furi- ous bull. She fled at first, but realized it wzs no use. She fell and the bull was upon her. She knew her only hope ^vas to sing to the bull, and when she did, though in a quavering voice, the bull calmed dowm and began licking her hand \vith its tongue. The interpretation showed that she could now learn to relate to men in a more confidently feminine way -- not only sexually, but erotically in the \\'ider sense of relatedness on the level of her conscious identity. But in the cases of older ^vomen, the Beast theme may not indicate the need to find the anstver to a personal father fixation or to release a sexual inhibition, or any of the things that the psychoanal>'tically minded rationalist may see in the m>"th. It can be, in fact, the expres- sion of a certain kind of woman's initiation, ^vhich may be just as meaningful at the onset of the menopause as at the height of adoles- cence ; and it maj- appear at any age, when the union of spirit and nature has been disturbed. A woman of menopausal age reported the follo\ving dream : I am wth several anonymous women whom I don't seem to know. tVe go do^vnstai^s in a strange house, and are confronted suddenly by some grotesque "ape-men" with evil faces dressed in fur wth grey and black rings, with tails, hor- rible and leering. We are completely in their power, but suddenly I feel the only way we can save ounelves is not to panic and run or fight, but to treat these creatures with humanity as if to make them aware of their better side. So one of the ape-men comes up to me and I greet him like a dancing partner and begin to dance with him. Later, 1 have been given supernatural healing powers and there is a man who is at death's door. I have a kind of quill or perhaps a bird's beak through which I blow air into his nostrils and he begins to breathe again. During the years of her marriage and the raising of her children, tliis tvoman had been obhged to neglect her creative gift, with tvhich she had once made a small but genuine reputa- tion as a writer. At the time of her dream she had been trying to force herself back to work again, at the same time criticizing herself un- mercifully for not being a better tvife, friend, and mother. The dream showed her problem in the light of other tvomen who might be going through a similar transition, descending, as the dream puts it, into the lower regions of a strange house from a too highly conscious level. This vve can guess to be the entrance to some meaningful aspect of the collective unconscious, with its challenge to accept the masculine prin- ciple as animal-man, that same heroic, clown- like Trickster figure we met at the beginning of the primitive hero cycles. For her to relate to this ape-man, and hu- manize him by bringing out what is good in him, meant that she would first have to accept some unpredictable element of her natural creative spirit. With this she could cut across the conventional bonds of her life and learn to write in a new way, more appropriate for her in the second part of life. That this impulse is related to the creative masculine principle is shown in the second scene where she resuscitates a man by blowing air through a kind of bird's beak into his nose. This pneumatic procedure suggests the need for a revival of the spirit rather than the principle of erotic warmth. It is a symbolism known all over the world : The ritual act brings the creative breath of life to any new achievement. The dream of another woman emphasizes the "nature" aspect of Beauty and the Beast : Something flies or is thrown in through the window, like a large insect with whirling spiral legs, yellow and black. It then becomes a queer animal, striped yellow and black, like a tiger, with bear-like, almost human paws and a pointed wolf- like face. It may run loose and harm children. It is Sunday afternoon, and I see a little girl all dressed in white on her way to Sunday school. I must get the police to help. But then I see the creature has become part woman, part animal. It fawns upon me, wants to be loved. I feel it's a fairy-tale situation, or a dream, and only kindness can transform it. I try to embrace it warmly, but I can't go through with it. I push it away. But I have the feeling I must keep it near and get used to it and maybe some- day I'll be able to kiss it. Here we have a different situation from the previous one. This woman had been too inten- sively carried away by the masculine creative function within herself, which had become a compulsive, mental (that is, "air-bome") pre- occupation. Thus she has been prevented from discharging her feminine, wifely function in a natural way. (In association to this dream she said : "When my husband comes home, my creative side goes underground and I become the over-organized housewife.") Her dream takes this unexpected turn of transforming her spirit gone bad into the woman she must accept and cultivate in herself ; in this way she can harmonize her creative intellectual interests with the instincts that enable her to relate warmly to others. This involves a new acceptance of the dual principle of life in nature, of that which is cruel but kind, or, as we might say in her case, ruth- lessly adventurous but at the same time humbly and creatively domestic. These opposites obri- ously cannot be reconciled except on a highly sophisticated psychological level of awareness, and would of course be harmful to that inno- cent child in her Sunday-school dress. The interpretation one could place on this woman's dream is that she needed to overcome some excessively naive image of herself. She had to be willing to embrace the full polarity of her feelings -- ^just as Beauty had to give up the innocence of trusting in a father who could not give her the pure white rose of his feeling with- out a^vakening the beneficent fury of the Beast. Above,the Greekgod Dionysus ecstatically playing the lute (in a vase painting).Thefrenzied and orgiastic rites ofthe Dionysiac cultssymbolized initiation into nature's mysteries. Right, Maenads worshiping Dionysus; far right, satyrs in thesamewild worship. Orpheus and the Son of Man "Beauty and the Beast" is a fairy tale with the quality of a ^vildflower, appearing so unexpect- edly and creating in us such a natural sense of wonder that we do not notice for the moment that it belongs to a definite class, genus, and species of plant. The kind of mystery inherent in such a story is given a universal application not only in a larger historical myth, but also in the rituals whereby the myth is expressed or from which it may be derived. The type of ritual and myth appropriately expressing this type of psychological experience is exemplified in the Greco-Roman religion of Dionysus, and in its successor, the religion of Orpheus. Both of these religions provided a significant initiation of the t-j'pe knorra as "mys- teries." They brought forth symibols associated with a god-man of androg^mous character \vho was supposed to have an intimate understand- ing of the animal or plant ^vorld and to be the master of initiadon into their secrets. The Dionj'siac religion contained orgiasdc rites that implied the need for an initiate to abandon himseK to his animal nature and thereby experience the full fertilizing power of the Earth Mother. The initiating agent for this rite of passage in the Dionysiac ritual was wine. It was supposed to produce the symbolic lower- ing of consciousness necessary to introduce the novice into the closely guarded secrets of nature, whose essence ^vas expressed by a sym- bol of erotic fulfillment: the god Dionysus joined wth Ariadne, his consort, in a sacred marriage ceremony. In time the rites of Dion^-sus lost their emo- tive reh'gious power. There emerged an almost oriental longing for hberation from their exclu- sive preoccupation ^vith the purely natural sym- bols of life and love. The Dionysiac religion, shifting constantly from spiritual to physical and back again, jjerhaps proved too svild and turbulent for some more ascetic souls. These came to experience their religious ecstasies in- wardly, in the ^vo^ship of Orpheus. Orpheus was probably a real man, a singer, prophet, and teacher, who ^vas martyred and ^vhose tomb became a shrine. No ^vonder the early Christian church sa^v in Orpheus the pro- tot)^e of Christ. Both religions brought to the late-Hellenistic \s-orld the promise of a future di\ine life. Because they tvere men, yet also mediators of the di-vine, for the multitudes of the d)ing Grecian culture in the da)-s of the Roman Empire they held the longed-for hope of a future life. There was, however, one important differ- ence between the religion of Orpheus and the religion of Christ. Though sublimated into a mystical form, the Orphic mj'steries kept alive the old Dionj-siac religion. The spiritual im- petus came from a demi-god, in whom -was preserved the most significant quality of a religion rooted in the art of agriculture. That quality was the old pattern of the fertility gods who came only for the season -- ^in other words, the eternally recurrent cycle of birth, growth, fullness, and decay. - Christiam'ty, on the other hand, dispelled the m^-steries. Christ was the product and reformer of a patriarchal, nomadic, pastoral religion, whose prophets represented their Messiah as a being of absolutely divine origin. The Son of Man, though bom of a human \-irgin, had his beginning in heaven, whence he came in an act of God's incarnation in man. After his death, he returned to heaven -- but returned once and for aU, to reign on the right hand of God until the Second Coming "when the dead shall arise." Of course the asceticism of early Christianity did not last. Thememory of the cych'c m>'steries haunted its followers to the extent that the Chiuch eventually had to incorporate many practices from the pagan past into its rituals. The most meaningfiil of these may be found in the old records of what w'as done on Holy Saturday and Easter Sunday in celebration of the resurrection of Christ -- the baptismal ser- vdce that the medieval church made into a suit- able and deeply meaningful initiation rite. But that ritual has scarcely survived into modem times, and it is completely absent in Pro- testantism. The ritual that has survived much better, and that still contains the meaning of a central initiation mj-sterj' for the devout, is the Catholic practice of the elevation of the chalice. It has been described by Dr. Jung in his "Transfor- mation Sjmbolism in the Mass" : "The lifting up of the chalice in the air pre- pares the spiritualization ... of the wine. This is confirmed by the invocation to the Holy Ghost that immediately follows. . . . The invo- cation serves to infuse the wine with holy spirit, for it is the Holy Ghostwho begets, fulfills, and transforms. . . . After the elevation, the chalice was, in former times, set down to the right of the Host, to correspond with the blood that flowed from the right side of Christ." The ritual of communion is every^vhere the same, whether it is expressed by drinking of the cup of Dionysus or of the holy Christian cha- lice; but the level of awareness each brings to the individual participant is different. The Dionysiac participant looks back to the origin of things, to the "storm-birth" of the god who is blasted from the resistant womb of Mother Earth. In the frescoes of the Villa de Misted in Pompeii, the enacted rite evoked the god as a mask of terror reflected in the cup of Dionysus offered by the priest to the initiate. Later we find the wixmowing basket, with its precious fruits of the earth, and the phallus as creative symbols of the god's manifestation as the prin- ciple of breeding and growth. In contrast to this backward look, %vith its central focus on nature's eternal cycle of birth and death, the Christian, mystery points for- ward to the initiate's ultimate hope of union rvith a transcendent god. Mother Nature, -with Above, a Dionysiac ritualdepicted onthe greattresco intheVWIa of the Mysteries at Pompeii. In thecenteran initiate is offered theCeremonialcup ofDionysus, in whichheseesa reflection ofthe god-maskhe)d behind. This isa symbolic infusion ofthe drink with thegod'sspitit -- whichcan be said to parallel the Roman Catholic ceremony ofelevating the chalice duringMass (below). 5? \e^-'-:..^!V,:.l',X*'X " '"!• ' ', <=5i^ *'-] • \>i!.'.u c-^'* i-m wvz2m;k^y^n/il' smmL WknA^ m0: Left,Orpheuscharming the beasts with hissong (in a Roman mosaic) ; above,the murder ofOrpheusby Thracianwomen (on a Greekvase). Below left, Christas theGood Shepherd (a sixth-century mosaic). Both Orpheusand Christ parallel thearchetype oftheman of nature -- also reflected in the painting by Cranach (below) of "natural man's" innocence. Facing page, left,the 1 8th-century French philosopher Rousseau,who putforward the idea ofthe "noblesavage" -- thesimple child ofnature free ofsinand evil. Far right,the titlepage of Walden, ,bythe 1 9th-centuryAmerican writer Thoreau.whobelievedinandfollowed a naturalway of lifealmostwholly Independent of civilization. all her beautiful seasonal changes, has been left behind, and the central figure of Christianity offers spiritual certainty, for he is the Son of God in heaven. Yet the t^\'o somehow fuse in the figure of Orpheus, the god who remembers Dion^'sus but looks forward to Christ. The psj-chological sense of this intermediate figure has been de- scribed by the Swiss author Linda Fierz-David, in her interpretation of the Orphic rite pictured in the Villa de Misteri : "Orpheus taught while he sang and played the l)Te, and his singing svas so po\verful that it mastered all nature; when he sang to his Intc the birds flew about liim, the fish left the water and sprang to him. The wind and the sea became still, the rivers flowed up^vard to- \vard him. It did not snow and there \vas no hail. Trees and the very' stones foUo^ved after Orpheus; tiger and lion lay doum near him next to the sheep, and the wolves next to the stag and the roe Now what does this mean? It surely means tliat through a dirine insight into the meaning of natural events . . . nature's happenings become harmoniously ordered from \\'ithin. Eveiything becomes light and all crea- tures arc appeased when the mediator, in the act of worshiping, represents the light of nature. Orpheus is an embodiment of devotion and piety; he symbolizes the religious attitude that solves all conflicts, since thereby the \vhole soul is turned toward that Avliich lies on the other side of all conflict. . . . And as he does tliis, he is truly Orpheus ; tliat is, a good shepherd, liis primitive embodiment. . . ." Botli as good shepherd and mediator, Orpheus strikes the balance between the Dio- nysiac religion and the Christian religion, since we find both Dionysus and Christ in similar roles, though, as I have said, differently orien- ted as to time and direction in space -- one a cyclic religion of the nether ^vorld, the other heavenly and eschatological, or final. This series of initiatory events, dra\\Ti from the context of rclieious history, is repeated endlessly and srith practically every conceivable individual tsrist of meaning in tlie dreams and fantasies of modem people. In a state of hea\y fatigue and depression, a woman undergoing analysis had tliis fantasy : I sit on tlie side of a long narrow table in a high vaulted room with no tvindotv. My body is hunched over and shrunken. Tliere is nothing over me but a long white linen cloth that hangs from my shoulders to tlie floor. Something crucial has happened to me. There is not much life left in me. Red crosses on gold disks appear before my eyes. I recall that I have made some sort of commitment a long time ago and wherever I am now must be part of this. I sit there a long time. Now I slowly open my eyes and I see a man who sits beside me who is to heal me. He appears natural and kind and he is talking to me though I don't hear him. He seems to know all about where I have been. I am aware that I am very ugly and tliat tliere must be an odor of death around me. I wonder if he will be repelled. I look at him for a very long time. He does not turn away. I breathe more easily. Then I feel a cool breeze, or cool water, pour overmy body. I wrap the white linen cloth across me now and prepare for a natural sleep. The man's healing hands are on my shoulders. I recall vaguely that there was a time tvhen tliere were wounds there but the pressure of his hands seems to give me strength and healing. This woman had previously felt threatened by doubts about her original religious affilia- tion. She had been brought up as a devout M5 Catholic of the old school, but since her youth she had struggled to free herself from the formal religious conventions followed by her family. Yet the symbolic events of the church year and the richness of her insight into their meaning remained with her throughout the process of her psychological change ; and in her analysis I found this working knowledge of religious symbolism most helpful. The significant elements she singled out of her fantasy were the white cloth, which she understood as a sacrificial cloth; the vaulted room, which she considered to be a tomb ; and her commitment, which she associated with the experience of submission. This commitment, as she called it, suggested a ritual of initiation with a perilous descent into the vault of death, which symbolized the way she had left church and family to experience God in her own fashion. She had undergone an "imitation of Christ" in the true symbolic sense, and like him she had suffered the wounds that preceded this death. The sacrificial cloth suggests the winding sheet or shroud in which the crucified Christ was wrapped and then placed in the tomb. The end of the fantasy introduces the healing figure of a man, loosely associated with me as her analyst but appearing also in his natural role as a friend fully aware of her experience. He speaks to her in words she cannot yet hear, but his hands are reassuring and give a sense of healing. One senses in this figure the touch and the word of the good shepherd, Orpheus or Christ, as mediator and also, of course, as healer. He is on the side of life and has to con- vince her that she may now come back from the vault of death. Shall we call this rebirth or resurrection? Both, perhaps, or neither. The essential rite pro- claims itself at the end ; The cool breeze or water flowing over her body is the primordial act of purification or cleansing of the sin of death, the essence of true baptism. The same woman had another fantasy in which she felt that her birthday fell upon the day of Christ's resurrection. (This was much more meaningful for her than the memory of her mother, who had never given her the feel- I ing of reassurance and renewal she so much wished for on her childhood birthdays.) But this did not mean she identihed herself with the figure of Christ. For all his power and glory, something was lacking; and as she tried to reach him through prayer, he and his cross were lifted up to heaven out of her human reach. In this second fantasy she fell back upon the symbol of rebirth as a rising sun, and a new feminine symbol began to make its appearance. First of aU it appeared as an "embryo in a watery sack." Then she was carrying an eight- year-old boy through the water "passing a danger point." Then a new movement occurred in which she no longer felt threatened or under the influence of death. She ^vas "in a forest by a little spring ^vaterfall . . . green vines grow all around. In my hands I have a stone bowl in which there is spring water, some green moss, and violets. I bathe myself under the waterfall. It is golden and 'silky' and I feel hke a chUd." The sense of these events is clear, though it is possible to miss the inner meaning in the cryp- tic description of so many changing images. Here we have, it seems, a process of rebirth in which a larger spiritual self is reborn and bap- tized in nature as a child. Meanwhile she has rescued an older child who was, in some way, her o\vn ego at the most traumatic period of her childhood. She then carried it through water past the danger point, thus indicating her fear of a paralyzing sense of guilt if she should Above left,the Persiangod Mithras sacrificing the bull.The sacrifice (also part of Dionysiac rites) can beseen as asymbol ofthe victory ofman's spiritual nature over his animality -- ofwhichthe bull isa common symbol. (Thismay explain the popularity insome countries of bullfighting, left.) Right,an etching by Picasso (1935) depicts a girlthreatenedby a Minotaur -- here,as in the myth ofTheseus, a symbol ofman's uncontrollable instinctive forces. depart too far from her family's conventional religion. But religious symbolism is significant by its absence. All is in the hands of nature ; we are clearly in the realm of the shepherd Orpheus rather than the risen Christ. A dream followed this sequence, tvhich brought her to a church resembhng the church in Assisi with Giotto's frescoes of St. Francis. She felt more at home here than she would in other churches because St. Francis, like Orpheus, was a religious man of nature. This revived her feelings about the change in her religious affiliation that had been so painful to undergo, but now she believed she could joy- fully face the experience, inspired by the light of nature. The series of dreams ended with a distant echo of the rehgion of Dionysus. (One could say that this was a reminder that even Orpheus can at times be a httle too far removed from the fecundating power of the animal-god in man.) She dreamed that she was leading a fair- haired child by the hand. "We arc happily participating in a festival that includes the sun and the forests and flowers aU around. The child has a little white flower in her hand, and she places it on the head of a black bull. The buU is part of the festival and is covered with festive decorations." This reference recalls the ancient rites that celebrated Dionysus in the guise of a bull. But the dream did not end there. The woman added : "Some time later the bull is pierced by a golden arrow." Now, besides Dionysus, there is another pre-Christian rite in ^vhich the bull plays a s)'mbohc role. The Per- sian sun-god Mithras sacrifices a bull. He, like Orpheus, represents the longing for a life of the spirit that might triumph over the primitive animal passions of man and, after a ceremony of initiation, give him peace. This series of images confirms a suggestion that is found in many fantasy or dream sequences of this type -- that there is no final peace, no resting point. In their religious quest men and women -- especially those 'ivho five in modem Western Christianked societies -- are still in the power of those early traditions that strive ^\dthin them for supremacy. It is a con- flict of pagan or Christian behefs, or, one might say, of rebirth or resurrection. A more direct clue to the solution of this dilemma is to be found, in this woman's first fantasy, in a curious piece of symbolism that could easily be overlooked. The woman says that in her death vault she saw before her eyes a vision of red crosses on gold disks. As became clear later in her analysis, she was about to ex- perience a profound psychic change and to emerge out of this "death" into a new kind of life. We might imagine, therefore, that this image, \vhich came to her in the depth of her despair of life, should in some way herald her future religious attitude. In her subsequent work she did in fact produce evidence for thinking that the red crosses represented her devotion to the Christian attitude, while the gold disks re- presented her devotion to the pre-Christian mystery religions. Her vision had told her that she must reconcile these Christian and pagan elements in the new life that lay ahead. One last, but important, obsei^'ation con- cerns the ancient initiation rites and their rela- tion to Christianity. The initiation rite cele- brated in the Eleusinian mysteries (the rites of worship of the fertihty goddesses Demeter and Persephone) was not considered appropriate merely for those who sought to five life more abundantly; it was also used as a preparation for death, as if death also required an initia- tory rite of passage of the same kind. On a funeral um found in a Roman grave near the Columbarium on the Esquiline Hill we find a clear bas-relief representing scenes of the final stage of initiation where tlie novice is admitted to the presence and converse of the goddesses. The rest of the design is devoted to two preliminary ceremonies of purification -- the sacrifice of the "mystic pig," and a mysticized version of the sacred marriage. This all points to an initiation into death, but in a form that lacks the finality of mourning. It hints at that element of the later mysteries -- especially of Orphism -- ^which makes death carry a promise of immortahty. Christianity went even further. It promised something more than immortality (which in the old sense of the cyclic mysteries might merely mean reincarnation), for it offered the faithful an everlasting life in heaven. So we see again, in modem life, the tendency to repeat old patterns. Those svho have to learn to face death may have to relearn the old mes- sage that tells us that death is a mystery for which we must prepare ourselves in the same spirit of submission and humihty as tve once learned to prepare ourselves for life. Symbols of transcendence The symbols that influence man vary in their purpose. Some men need to be aroused, and experience their initiation in the violence of a Dionysiac "thunder rite." Others need to be subdued, and they are brought to submission in the ordered design of temple precinct or sacred cave, suggestive of the Apollonian religion of later Greece. A full initiation embraces both themes, as ^^'e can see when we look either at the material drawTi from ancient texts or at living subjects. But it is quite certain that the fundamental goal of initiation lies in taming the original Trickster-like %s'ildness of the juvenile nature. It therefore has a civilizing or spiritu- alizing purpose, in spite of the violence of the rites that are required to set this process in motion. There is, however, another kind of symbolism, belonging to the earliest kno^sn sacred tradi- tions, that is also connected with the periods of transition in a person's life. But these symbols do not seek to integrate the initiate ^vith any religious doctrine or secular group-conscious- ness. On the contrary, they point to man's need for liberation from any state of being that is too immature, too fixed or final. In other words, they concern man's release from -- or transcend- ence of -- any confining pattern of existence, as he moves toward a superior or more mature stage in his development. A child, as I have said, possesses a sense of completeness, but only before the initial emer- gence of his ego-consciousness. In the case of an adult, a sense of completeness is achieved through a union of the consciousness %vith the unconscious contents of the mind. Out of this union arises \vhat Jung called "the transcendent function of the psyche," by which a man can achieve his highest goal : the full reahzation of the potential of his individual Self. Both a bird and ashaman (i.e., a primitive medicine man) are commonsymbols oftranscendence, and often arecombined : Left, a prehistoriccave painting at Lascaux showsashamaninabirdmask.Beiow, ashaman priestess of a Siberian people, in a bird costume. Right, a shaman's coffin (also Siberian) with bird figureson the posts. Thus, what we call "symbols of transcend- ence" are the sj-mbols that represent man's strisang to attain this goal. They provide the means by ^vhich the contents of the imconscious can enter the conscious mind, and they also are themselves an active expression of those contents. Thesesymbols are manifold in form. Whether ^ve encounter them in history' or in the dreams of contemporary' men and -women ^vho are at a critical stage in their lives, we can see their importance. At the most archaic level of this sy'mbolism ^ve again meet the Trickster theme. But this time he no longer appears as a la^vless %vould-be hero. He has become the shaman -- the medicine man -- ^whose magical practices and flights of intuition stamp him as a primitive master of initiation. His power resides in his supposed ability to leave his body and fly about tlie universe as a bird. In this case the bird is the most fitting symbol of transcendence. It represents the pecu- liar nature of intuition working through a "medium," that is, an indi^'idualwho is capable of obtaining knowledge of distant events -- or facts of which he consciously knows nothing -- by going into a trancelike state. E-vidence of such po-ivers can be found as far back as the paleolithic period of prehistory, as the American scholar Joseph Campbell has pointed out in commenting upon one of the famous cave paintings recendy discovered in France. At Lascaux, he -smtes, "there is a sha- man depicted, lying in a trance, wearing a bird mask wth a figure of a bird perched on a staff beside him. The shamans of Siberia wear such bird costumes to this day, and many are be- lieved to have been conceived by their mothers from the descent of a bird .... The shaman, then, is not only a familiar denizen, but even the favored scion of those realms of po^ver that are in\isible to our normal waking conscious- ness, which all may visit briefly in vision, but through which he roams, a master." At the highest level of this type of initiatory activity, far from those tricks-of-the-trade by which magic so frequently replaces true spiritual insight, we find the Hindu master yogis. In their trance states they go far beyond the nor- mal categories of thought. One of the commonest dream symbols for this type of release through transcendence is the theme of the lonely journey or pOgrimage, which somehow seems to be a spiritual pilgrim- In myths ordreams,a lonelyjourney oftensymbolizesthe liberation of transcendence.Above,a 1 5th-century painting ofthe Italian poetDante holding hisbook (theDivineComedy) which relates hisdreamofajourney to hell (lower left of picture), purgatory,and heaven. Farleftan engraving ofthejourneymadebythe pilgrim inthe British authorJohn Bunyan'sPilgrim'sProgress (1678) . (Notethatthejourney is a circular movementtowardan innercenter.) Thisbook, too, istold asa dream ; leftthe pilgrimdreaming. Manypeoplemaywantsomechange from a containing pattern of life ; butthefreedomgainedbyUavel (urgedbythe "runawayto sea" postet right) isno substitute fora trueinnerliberation. age on which the initiate becomes acquainted with the nature of death. But this is not death as a last judgment or other initiatory trial of strength ; it is a journey of release, renuncia- tion, and atonement, presided over and fostered by some spirit of compassion. This spirit is more often represented by a "mistress" rather than a "master" of initiation, a supreme feminine (i.e., anima) figure such as Kwan-Yin in Chinese Buddhism, Sophia in the Christian-Gnostic doct- rine, or the ancient Greek goddess of wisdom Pallas Athena. Not only the flight of birds or the journey into the wilderness represents this syonbolism, but any strong movement exemplifjong release. In the first part of life, when one is still attached to the original family and social group, this may be experienced as that moment of initia- tion at which one must learn to take the decisive steps into life alone. It is the moment that T. S. Eliot describes in "The Waste Land," when one faces The awful daring of a moment's surrender, which an age of prudence can never retract. At a later period of life one may not need to break all ties ^vith the symbols of meaningful containment. But nonetheless one can be filled with that spirit of divine discontent which forces all free men to face some new discovery or to live their lives in a new way. This change may become especially important in the period be- tween middle age and old age, ^vhich is the time in life when so many people are consider- ing what to do in their retirement -- ^whether to work or to play, whether to stay at home or to travel. If their lives have been adventurous, insecure, or full of change, they may long for a settled life and the consolations of religious certainty. But if they have hved chiefly within the social pattern in which they were bom, they may desperately need a liberating change. This need may be filled, temporarily, by a trip around the world, or by nothing more than a move to a smaller house. But none of these external changes will serve uiJess there has been some iimer transcendence of old values in creating, not just inventing, a new pattern of life. A case of this latter sort is a woman who had lived in a style of life that she, her family, and friends had long enjoyed because it was so well rooted, culturally nourishing, and secure from transitory fashions. She had this dream : I found some strange pieces of wood, not carved but with natural beautiful shapes. Some- Left, the British explorer R. F. Scott and his companions, photographed in theAntarctic in 1 91 1 . Explorers, venturing into theunknown, provide an aptimage ofthe liberation,the breaking out of containment, that characterizestranscendence. Thesymbol ofthesnake iscommonly linked with transcendence,because itwas traditionallya creature of the underworld -- andthuswas a "mediator"between oneway of life and another. Right, thesnakeand staffsymbol ofthe Greco-Roman god ofmedicineAsklepioson a card usedto identify a doctor'scar in modern France. one said : "Neanderthal man brought them." Then I saw at a dbtance these Neanderthal men looking like a dark mass, but I could not see one of them distinctly. I thought I ^vould take back from this place a piece of their \vood. Then I went on, as if on a journey by myself, and I looked do\s'n into an enormous abyss like an extinct volcano. Tliere was water in part of it and there I expected to see more Neandertlial men. But instead I sa\v black water pigs tliat had come out of the water and were running in and out of the black volcanic rocks. In contrast to this woman's family attach- ments and her highly cultivated style of life, the dream takes her to a prehistoric period more primitive than anjthing ^ve can visualize. She can find no social group among these ancient men ; She sees them as an embodiment of a truly unconscious, collective "dark mass" in the distance. Yet tliey are alive, and she may carry away a piece of their wood. The dream emphasizes that the wood is natural, not cars'ed ; therefore it comes from a primordial, not a cul- turally conditioned level of the unconscious. The piece of wood, remarkable for its great age, links tliis tvoman's contemporary experience to the distant origins of human life. IVe knotv from many examples that an ancient tree or plant represents sjinbolically the growth and development of psychic life (as distinct from instinctual life, commonly sjTnbo- lized by animals). Hence, in this piece of wood, this ^voman acquired a sytnbol of her link with the deepest layers of the collective unconscious. Next she speaks of continuing her Journey alone. This theme, as I have already pointed out, symbolizes the need for release as an initia- tory' experience. So here we have another sym- bol of transcendence. Then, in the dream, she sees a huge crater of an extinct volcano, \s'hich has been the channel for a \'iolent eruption of fire from the deepest layers of the earth. We can surmise that this refers to a significant memory trace, tvhich leads back to a traumatic experience. This she asso- ciated to a personal experience early in her life when she had felt the destructive, yet creative, force of her passions to such an extent that she feared she would go out of her mind. She had found, in late adolescence, a quite unexpected need to break atvay from her family's exces- sively conventional social pattern. She had achieved this break tvithout serious distress, and had been able to return eventually to make her peace with the family. But there lingered a profound \vish to make a still greater differen- tiation from her family background and to find freedom from her own pattern of existence. This dream recalls another. It came from a youngman who had a totally different problem but w'ho seemed to need a similar type of in- sight. He too had the urge to achieve differen- tiation. He dreamed of a volcano, and from its crater he saw Uvo birds taking flight as if in fear that the volcano \vas about to erupt. This was in a strange, lonely place ^vith a body of water between him and the volcano. In this case, the dream represented an individual initiation journey. It is similar to cases reported among the simple food-gathering tribes, which are the least family-conscious groups we know. In these societies the young initiate must take a lonely journey to a sacred place (in Indian cultures of the North Pacific coast, it may actually be a crater lake) where, in a visionary or trancelike state, he encounters his "guardian spirit" in the foim of an animal, a bird, or natural object. He closely identifies himself ^sith this 'fijush soul" and therebybecomes a man. "Without such an experience he is regarded, as an Achmnaui medicine man put it, as "an ordinary Indian, nobody." The young man's dream came at the begin- ning of his life, and it pointed to his future independence and identity as a man. The ^voman I have described was approaching the end of her life, and she experienced a similar journey and seemed to need to acquire a simi- lar independence. She could live out the re- mainder of her da^-s in harmony with an eternal hinnan law that, by its antiquity, transcended the kno\s-n symbols of culture. But such independence does not end in a state of yogi-like detachment that \s-ould mean a renunciation of the ^vorld ^\ith all its impuri- ties. In the othen\ise dead and blasted land- scape of her dream the tvoman sa'iV signs of animal life. These are "water pigs," unknown to her as a species. They therefore tvould carry the meaning of a special tj-pe of animal, one that can Ih'e in rivo emironments, in water or on the earth. This is the universal quality of the animal as a s}'mbol of transcendence. These creatures, figuradvely coming from the depths of the ancient Earth Mother, are s)Tnbolic denizens of the collective unconscious. They bring into the field of consciousness a special chthonic (under- world) message that is somewhat different from the spiritual aspirations symbolized by the birds in the young man's dream. Other transcendent symbols of the depths are rodents, lizards, snakes, and sometimes fish. These are intermediate creatm-es that combine imderwater actrvdty and the bird-flight srith an intermediate terrestrial life. The tsild duck or the swan are cases in point. Perhaps the com- monest dream symbol of transcendence is the snake, as represented by' the therapeutic symbol of the Roman god of medicine Aesculapius, which has siuvived to modem times as a sign of the medical profession. This svas originally a nonpoisonous tree snake ; as sve see it, coiled around the staff of the healing god, it seems to embody' a kind of mediation behveen earth and heaven. A still more important and widespread sym- bol of chthonic transcendence is the motif of the two entsvined serpents. These are the famous Naga serpents of ancient India; and we also find them in Greece as the enrisined serpents on the end of the staff belonging to the god Hermes. An early Grecian herm is a stone pillar with a bust of the god above. On one side are the entw'ined serpents and on the other an erect phallus. As the serpents are represented Left,a 1 7th-ceniury' French painting revealsthe snake's role asmediator behveen thisworldandthenext Orpheus isplaying his lyre ;he and hisaudience fail tonotice that Eurydice (centerof picture) hasbeen bittenbyasnake -- a fatal wound thatsymbolizesherdescent intothe undenvorld. Above, the EgyptiangodThothwith the head of a bird (an ibis), in a relieffrom c.350 B.c.Thoth is an"underworld" figureassociated with transcendence; itwashewho judgedthesoulsofthedead.The Greekgod Hermes,whowas called "psycho-pomp" (soul-guide),had thefunction ofguidingthedead totheunderworld. Left,astone fisrm.whichwasplaced atcross- roads (symbolizingthegod'srole asa mediatorbetweentwo worlds). Onthe side oftheherm isa snaketwinedaround astaff;this symbol (the caduceus)wascarried overtotheRomangodMercury (righLa 1 6th-century Italian bronze),whoalsoacquiredwings, recalling the birdasasymbolof spiritual transcendence. *55 in the act of sexual union and the erect phallus is unequivocally sexual, we can draw certain conclusions about the function of the herm as a symbol of fertility. But we are mistaken if we think this only refers to biological fertility. Hermes is Trickster in a different role as a messenger, a god of the cross-roads, and finally the leader of souls to and from the underworld. His phallus therefore penetrates from the known into the unknown world, seeking a spiritual message of deliverance and healing. Originally in Egypt Hermes was known as the ibis-headed god Thoth, and therefore was conceived as the bird form of the transcendent principle. Again, in the Olympian period of Greek mythology, Hermes recovered attributes of the bird life to add to his chthonic nature as serpent. His staff acquired wings above the ser- pents, becoming the caduceus or winged staff of Mercury, and the god himself became the "flying man" with his winged hat and sandals. Here we see his full power of transcendence whereby the lower transcendence from under- world snake-consciousness, passing through the medium of earthly reality, finally attains trans- cendence to superhuman or transpersonal reality in its winged flight. Such a composite symbol is found in other representations as the winged horse or winged dragon or other creatures that abound in the artistic expressions of alchemy, so fully illus- trated in Dr. Jung's classic work on this subject. We follow the innumerable vicissitudes of these symbols in our work with patients. They show what our therapy can expect to achieve when it liberates the deeper psychic contents so that they can become part of our conscious equip- ment for understanding life more effectively. It is not easy for modem man to grasp the significance of the symbols that come down to us from the past or that appear in our dreams. Nor is it easy to see how the ancient conflict between symbols of containment and hberation relates to our otvn predicament. Yet it becomes easier ^vhen we realize it is only the specific forms of these archaic patterns that change, not their psychic meaning. We have been talking of wild birds as sym- bols of release or liberation. But today we could as tvell speak of jet planes and space rockets, for they are the physical embodiment of the same transcendent principle, freeing us at least temporarily from gravity. In the same w'ay the ancient symbols of containment, which once gave stability and protection, now appear in modem man's search for economic security and social tvelfare. Any of us can see, of course, that there is a conflict in our lives beUveen adventure and dis- cipline, or evil and virtue, or freedom and security. But these are only phrases we use to describe an ambivalence that troubles us, and to tvhich we never seem able to find an answer. There is an answer. There is a meeting point between containment and liberation, and we can find it in the rites of initiation that I have been discussing. They can make it possible for individuals, or tvhole groups of people, to unite the opposing forces within themselves and achieve an equilibrium in their lives. But the rites do not offer this opportunity invariably, or automatically. They relate to particular phases in the life of an individual, or of a group, and unless they are properly under- stood and translated into a new way of life, the moment can pass. Initiation is, essentially, a process that begins with a rite of submission, followed by a period of containment, and then by a further rite of liberation. In this way every indiwdual can reconcile the conflicting elements of his personality ; He can strike a balance that makes him tmly human, and truly the master of himself. Inthedreamsand fantasies ofmany modempeople,theflights ofthe greatrocketsofspace research haveoften appeared assymbolic 20th-centuryembodiments ofthe urgetoward liberation and release that is called transcendence. 3 The process of individuation WI. - L. von Franz The rosewindow ofthe cathedral of Notre Dame, Paris The process of individuation The pattern of psychic growth At the beginning of this book Dr. C. G. Jung introduced the reader to the concept of the un- conscious, its personal and collective structures, and its symbolic mode of expression. Once one has seen the vital importance (that is, tlic heal- ing or destructive impact) of the symbols pro- duced by the unconscious, there remains the difficult problem of interpretation. Dr. Jung has shown that everything depends on whether any particular interpretation "clicks" and is mean- ingful to the individual concerned. In this way he has indicated the possible meaning and func- tion of dream symbolism. But, in the development of Jung's theory, this possibility raised another question ; What is the purpose of the total dream life of tlic in- dividual? What role do dreams play, not only in the immediate psychic economy of the hu- man being, but in his life as a whole? By observing a great many people and study- ing their dreams (he estimated tliat he inter- preted at least 80,000 dreams), Jung discovered not only that all dreams arc relevant in vary'ing degrees to the life of the dreamer, but that they arc all parts of one great \vcb of psychological factors. He also found that, on the \vholc, they seem to follow an arrangement or pattern. This pattern Jung called "the process of individua- tion." Since dreams produce different scenes and images every night, people who arc not careful observers will probably be unaware of any pattern. But if one watches one's own dreams over a period of years and studies the entire sequence, one \vill see that certain con- tents emerge, disappear, and then turn up again. Many people even dream repeatedly of the same figures, landscapes, or situations ; and if one follows these through a whole series, one will see that they change slowly but perceptibly. These changes can be accelerated if the dream- er's conscious attitude is influenced by appro- priate interpretation of the dreams and their symbolic contents. Below, a "meander" (a decoration in a seventh-centurymanuscript). Individualdreamsseem asstrange and fragmented asthe detail, above, from the decoration ; butovera lifetime's dreaming, a meandering pattern appears -- revealing the process of psychic growth. i6o Thus our dream life creates a meandering pattern in which indmdual strands or tenden- cies become \Tsible, tlien vanish, then return again. If one \vatchcs this meandering design over a long period of time, one can observe a sort of hidden regulating or directing tendency at work, creating a slow, imperceptible process of ps)'chicgrowth -- the process of indiriduation. Gradually a under and more mature person- alit)' emerges, and by degrees becomes effective and even ^^siblc to others. The fact that we often speak of "arrested development" shou-s that ^^e assume that such a process of gro\s'th and maturation is possible \rith every indiri- dual. Since this psychic gro\vth cannot be brought about by a conscious effort of \vill po\ver, but happens involuntarily and natur- ally, it is in dreams frequently s>Tnbolizcd by the tree, whose slow, powerful, involuntary' growth fulfills a definite pattern. The organizing center from ^vllich the regu- latory effect stems seems to be a sort of "nu- clear atom" in our psychic system. One could also call it the inventor, organizer, and source of dream images. Jung called this center the "Self' and described it as the totality of the ^vhole psyche, in order to distinguish it from the "ego," svhich constitutes only a small part of the total psyche. Throughout the ages men have been intui- tively atvare of the existence of such an inner center. The Greeks called it man's inner dai- mon ; in Egy'pt it was expressed by the concept of the Ba-soul; and the Romans worshiped it as the "genius" native to each individual. In more primitive societies it svas often thought of as a protective spirit embodied ^vithin an animal or a fetish. This inner center is realized in exceptionally pure, unspoiled form by the Naskapi Indians, who still exist in the forests of the Labrador peninsula. These simple people are hunters who live in isolated family groups, so far from one A Ego Thepsyche can becompared to a sphere with a bright field (A) on its surface, representing consciousness. Theego isthe field'scenter (only if "I"know a thing is itconscious). The Self IS atonce the nucleus andthewhole sphere (B) ; its internal regulating processesproducedreams, anotlier that they have not been able to evolve tribal customs or collective religious beliefs and ceremonies. In his lifelong solitude the Naskapi hunter has to rely on his own inner voices and tmconscious revelations; he has no religious teachers %vho tell him tvhat he should believe, no rituals, festivals, or customs to help him along. In his basic rictv of life, the soul of man is simply an "inner companion," whom he calls "my friend" or Misla'peo, meaning "Great Man." Mista'peo dwells in the heart and is im- mortal; in the moment of death, or shortly before, he leaves the individual, and later re- incarnates himself in anotlier being. Those Naskapi who pay attention to their dreams and who try' to find their meaning and test their truth can enter into a deeper connec- tion 'vith the Great Man. He favors such people and sends tliem more and better dreams. Thus the major obligation of an indiridual Naskapi is to follow the instructions given by his dreams, and then to give permanent form to their contents in art. Lies and dishonesty drive the Great Man away from one's inner realm, whereas generosity and love of one's neighbors and of animals attract him and give i6i f him life. Dreams give the Naskapi complete ability to find his way in life, not only in the inner world but also in the outer world of na- ture. They help him to foretell the weather and give him invaluable guidance in his hunting, upon which his life depends. I mention these very primitive people because they are uncon- taminated by our civilized ideas and still have natural insight into the essence of what Jung calls the Self. The Self can be defined as an inner guiding factor that is different from the conscious per- sonality and that can be grasped only through the investigation of one's o%vn dreams. These show it to be the regulating center that brings about a constant extension and maturing of the personality. But this larger, more nearly total aspect of the psyche appears first as merely an inborn possibility. It may emeig^e very slightly, or it may develop relatively completely during one's lifetime. How far it develops depends on whether or not the ego is willing to listen to the messages of the Self. Just as the Naskapi have noticed that a person who is receptive to the hints of the Great Man gets better and more helpful dreams, ^ve could add that the inborn Great Man becomes more real N\dthin the receptive person than in those ^s'ho neglect him. Such a person also becomes a more complete hrnnan being. It even seems as if the ego has not been pro- duced by natme to follo^v its own arbitrary impulses to an imlimited extent, but to help to make real the totality -- the whole psyche. It is the ego that serves to light up the entire system, allo^ving it to become conscious and thus to be realized. If, for example, I have an artistic talent of W'hichmy ego is not conscious, nothing \vill happen to it. The gift may as well be non- existent. Only if my ego notices it can I bring it into reality. The inborn but hidden totality of the psyche is not the same thing as a whole- ness that is fuUy realized and lived. One could picture this in the foUotsdng way : The seed of a moimtain pine contains the ^vhole future tree in a latent form; but each seed falls at a certain time onto a particiJar place, in which there are a number of special factors, such as the quality of the soil and the stones, the slope of the land, and its exposure to sun and wind. The latent totality of the pine in the seed reacts to these circumstances by avoiding the stones and inclining toward the sun, with the result that the tree's growth is shaped. Thus an individual pine slowly comes into existence, constituting the fulfillment of its totality, its emergence into the realm of reality. Without the living tree, the image of the pme is only a possibility or an abstract idea. Again, the realization of this uniqueness in the individual man is the goal of the process of individuation. From one point of view this process takes place in man (as well as in every other liNong being) by itseh and in the unconscious ; it is a process by which man lives out his innate hu- man nature. Strictly speaking, how'ever, the process of individuation is real only if the indi- vidual is aware of it and consciously makes a living connection with it. We do not know whether the pine tree is aware of its otvn grotvth, whether it enjoys and suffers the dif- ferent vicissitudes that shape it. But man cer- tainly is able to participate consciously in hh development. He even feds that from time to time, by making free decisions, he can co- operate actively with it. This co-operation belongs to the process of individuation in the narrower sense ofthe word. Man, however, experiences something that is not contained in our metaphor of the pine tree. The individuation process is more than a coming to terms between the inborn germ of wholeness and the outer acts of fate. Its subjec- tive experience conveys the feeling that some supra-personal force is actively interfering in a creative way. One sometimes feels that the un- conscious is leading the way in accordance with a secret design. It is as if something is looking at me, something that I do not see but that sees me -- ^perhaps that Great Man in the heart, who teUs me his opinions about me by means of dreams. But this creatively active aspect of the psy- chic nucleus can come into play only when the ego gets rid of all purposive and wishful aims and tries to get to a deeper, more basic form of existence. The ego must be able to listen attentively and to give itself, ^vithout any fur- ther design or purpose, to that inner urge to- ward growth. Many existentialist philosophers try to describe this state, but they go only as far as stripping off tlie illusions of conscious- ness : They go right up to the door of the un- conscious and then fail to open it. People living in cultures more securely rooted than our own have less trouble in understand- ing that it is necessary to give up the utilitarian attitude of conscious planning in order to make way for the inner gro\vth of the personality. I once met an elderly lady who had not achieved much in her life, in terms of outward achieve- ment. But she had in fact made a good mar- riage with a difficult husband, and had some- how developed into a mature personality. When she complained' to me that she had not "done" anything in her life, I told her a stor)' related by a Chinese sage, Chuang-Tzu. She under- stood immediately and felt great relief. This is the story : A ^s'ande^ing carpenter, called Stone, saw on his travels a gigantic old oak tree standing in a field near an earth-altar. The carpenter said to his apprentice, who ^vas admiring the oak : "This is An earth altarbeneath a tree (in a 19th-century Chinese painting). Suchround orsquare structures usuallysymbolizethe Self, towhich theego mustsubmitto fulfillthe processof individuation. a useless tree. If you wanted to make a ship, it would soon rot; if you wanted to make tools, they would break. You can't do anything useful with this tree, and that's why it has become so old." But in an inn, that same evening, when the car- penter went to sleep, the old oak tree appeared to him in his dream and said : "Why do you com- pare me to your cultivated trees such as white- thorn, pear, orange, and apple trees, and all the others that bear fruit? Even before tliey can ripen their fruit, people attack and violate them. Their branches are broken, their twigs are torn. Their own gifts bring harm to them, and they cannot live out their natural span. That is what happens everywhere, and that is why I have long since tried to become completely useless. You poor mor- tal! Imagine if I had been useful in any way, would I have reached this size? Furthermore, you and I are both creatures, and how can one creature set himself so high as to judge another creature? You useless mortal man, what do you know about useless trees?" The carpenter woke up and meditated upon his dream, and later, when his apprentice asked him why just this one tree served to protect the earth- altar, he answered, "Keep your mouth shut! Let's hear no more about it ! The tree grew here on purpose because anywhere else people would have ill-treated it. If it were not the tree of the earth- altar, it might have been chopped down." The carpenter obviously understood his dream. He saw that simply to fulfill one's des- tiny is the greatest human achievement, and that our utilitarian notions have to give way in the face of the demands of our unconscious psy'che. If wc translate this metaphor into psy- chological language, the tree syTnbolizes the process of individuation, giving a lesson to our shortsighted ego. Under the tree that fulfilled its destiny, there was -- in Chuang-Tzu's story -- an earth-altar. This ^vas a crude, unwTought stone upon which people made sacrifices to the local god ^vho "owned" this piece of land. The symbol of the earth-altar points to the fact that in order to bring the individuation process into reality, one must surrender consciously to the po^ver of the unconscious, instead of thinking in terms of what one should do, or of what is generally thought right, or of %\'hat usually happens. One must simply listen, in order to learn what the -.'-ilL.. inner totality -- the Self -- wants one to do here and now in a particular situation. Our attitude must be like that of the moun- tain pine mentioned above : It does not get annoyed when its growth is obstructed by a stone, nor does it make plans about how to overcome the obstacles. It merely tries to feel whether it should grow more toward the left or the right, toward the slope or away from it. Like the tree, we should give in to this almost imperceptible, yet powerfully dominating, im- pulse -- an impulse that comes from the urge to- ward unique, creative self-realization. And this is a process in which one must repeatedly seek out and find something that is not yet known to anyone. The guiding hints or impulses come, not from the ego, but from the totality of the psyche: the Self. It is, moreover, useless to cast furtive glances at the way someone else is developing, because each of us has a unique task of self-realization. Although many human problems are similar, they are never identical. All pine trees are very much alike (otherwise we should not recognize them as pines), yet none is exactly the same as another. Because of these factors of sameness and difference, it is difficult to summarize the infinite variations of the process of individua- tion. The fact is that each person has to do something different, something that is uniqudy his own. Many people have criticized the Jungian approach for not presenting psychic material systematically. But these critics forget that the material itself is a living experience charged with emotion, by nature irrational and ever- changing, which does not lend itself to systema- tization except in the most superficial fashion. Modem depth psychology has here reached the same limits that confront microphysics. That is, when we are dealing with statistical averages, a rational and systematic description of the facts ^is possible. But when we are attempting to des- cribe a single psychic event, we can do no more than present an honest picture of it from as many angles as possible. In the same way, scien- tists have to admit that they do not know what light is. They can say only that in certain ex- perimental conditions it seems to consist of par- ticles, while in other experimental conditions it seems to consist of waves. But what it is "in itself" is not known. The psychology of the un- conscious and any description of the process of individuation encounter comparable difficulties of definition. But I will try here to give a sketch of some of their most typical features. The firstapproach ofthe unconscious For most people the years of youth are char- acterized by a state of gradual awakening in rvhich the indhidual slowly becomes aware of the world and of himself. Childhood is a period of great emotional intensity, and a child's earliest dreams often manifest in symbolic form the basic structure of the psyche, indicating how it will later shape tire destiny of tlie individual concerned. For example, Jung once told a group of students about a young tvoman who was so haunted by anxiety that she committed suicide at the age of 26. As a small child, she had dreamed tliat "Jack Frost" had entered her room ^vhiIe she rvas ^ing in bed and pinched her on the stomach. She woke and discovered that she had pinched herself \vith herown hand. The dream did not frighten her ; she merely re- membered that she had had such a dream. But the fact that she did not react emotionally to her strange encounter \vith the demon of the cold -- of congealed life -- did not augur well for the future and was itself abnormal. It was with a cold, unfeeling hand that she later put an end to her life. From this single dream it is possible to deduce the tragic fate of the dreamer, ^vhich was anticipated by her psyche in childhood. Sometimes it is not a dream but some very impressive and unforgettable real event that, like a prophecy, anticipates the future in sym- bolic form. It is well known that children often forget events that seem impressive to adults but keep a vivid recollection of some incident or story that no one else has noticed. When we look into one of these childhood memories, we usually find that it depicts (if interpreted as if it were a symbol) a basic problem of the child's psychic make-up. When a child reaches school age, the phase of building up the ego and of adapting to the outer \vorld begins. This phase generally brings a number of painful shocks. At the same time, some children begin to feel veiy' different from others, and this feeling of being unique brings a certain sadness that is part of the loneliness of many youngsters. The imperfecdons of the world, and the evil within oneself as rvell as out- Achild, adapting to the outside world, receivesmany psychological shocks : far left,the fearful first day atschool ; center, the surprise and pain resulting froman attack byanotherchild ; left,the grief and bewildermentofthe first experience ofdeath.As in effect a protection from such shocks, the childmaydream ordraw a circular, quadrangular, nuclearmotif (above) thatsymbolizesthe all-important centerofthe psyche. 165 side, become conscious problems ; the child must try to cope \sdth urgent (but not yet understood) inner impulses as ^vell as the demands of the outer world. If the development of consciousness is dis- turbed in its normal unfolding, children fre- quently retire from outer or inner difficulties into an inner "fortress" ; and when that hap- pens, their dreams and symbolic drawings of unconscious material often reveal to an unusual degree a type of circular, quadrangular, and "nuclear" motif (which I will explain later). This refers to the previously mentioned psychic nucleus, the vital center of the personality from which the whole structural development of con- sciousness stems. It is natural that the image of the center should appear in an especially strik- ing ^vay when the psychic life of the individual is threatened. From this central nucleus (as far aswe know today), the whole building up of ego consciousness is directed, the ego apparently be- ing a duplicate or structural counterpart of the original center. In this early phase there are many children who earnestly seek for some meaning in life that could help them to deal tvith the chaos both within and outside themselves. There are others, however, who are still xmconsciously carried alongby the dynamism of inherited and instinc- tive archetypal patterns. These young people are not concerned about the deeper meaning of life, because their experiences wth love, nature, sport, and ^vork contain an immediate and satisfyingmeaning forthem. They are not neces- sarily^ore superficial; usually they are carried by the stream of life with less friction and dis- turbance than their more introspective fellows. If I travel in a car or train wdthout looking out, it is only the stops, starts, and sudden turns that make me realize I am moving at aU. The actual process of individuation -- the con- scious coming-to-terms with one's own inner center (psychic nucleus) or Self -- generally be- gins with a wounding of the personality and the suffering that accompanies it. This initial shock amounts to a sort of "cah," although it is not often recognized as such. On the contrary, the ego feels hampered in its will or its desire and usually projects the obstruction onto something external. That is, the ego accuses God or the economic situation or the boss or the marriage partner of being responsible for ^vhatever is obstructing it. Or perhaps everything seems outwardly all right, but beneath the surface a person is suffer- ing from a deadly boredom that makes every- -.*e .•'1 I thing seem meaningless and empty. Many mytlis and fairy tales s^inbolically describe this initial stage in the process of individuation by telling of a king ^vho has fallen ill or grown old. Other familiar stor^' patterns arc that a royal couple is barren ; or that a monster steals all the women, children, horses, and %\-calth of the king- dom; or that a demon keeps the king's army or his ship from proceeding on its course; or that darkness hangs over the lands, wells dr)' up, and flood, drought, and frost afflict the countr)'. Thus it seems as if the initial encounter rdth the Self casts a dark shado^v alicad of time, or as if the "inner friend" comes at first like a trapper to catch the helplessly stniggling ego in his snare. In myths one finds that the magic or talisman that can cure the misfortune of the king or his country alwaj's proves to be something very special. In one talc "a ts'liite blackbird" or "a fish that carries a golden ring in its gills" is needed to restore the king's health. In anotlicr, the king wants "the tvatcr of life" or "three golden hairs from the head of the devil" or "a woman's golden plait" (and afterward, natur- ally, the otvncr of the plait). 'Whatever it is, the thing that can drive a^\•ay the c\'il is alwa)^ unique and hard to find. It is exactly the same in the initial crisis in the life of an individual. One is seeking some- thing that is impossible to find or about ^vhich nothing is knotra. In such moments all well- meant, sensible advice is completely useless -- advice that urges one to tiy' to be responsible, to take a holiday, not to work so hard (or to work harder), to have more (or less) human con- tact, or to take up a hobby. None of that helps, or at best only rarely. There is only one thing that seems to work ; and that is to turn directly toward the approaching darkness without pre- judice and totally naively, and to try' to find out what its secret aim is and what it wants from you. The hidden purpose of the oncoming dark- ness is generally something so unusual, so unique and unexpected, that as a rule one can find out what it is only by means of dreams and fanta- sies welling up from the unconsdous. If one focuses attention on the unconsdous without rash assumptions or emotional rejection, it often breaks through in a flow of helpful syTnbolic images. But not always. Sometimes it first offers a series of painful rcalizadons of what is wong with onesdf and one's conscious attitudes. Then one must begin the process by swallowing all sorts of bitter tniths. Far left, awoodcutfrom a 17th- centuryalchemical manuscript depictsa kingwho has fallen ill -- acommonsymbolicimago ofthe emptinessand boredom (inthe consciousness) thatcan markthe initial stage ofthe individuation process. Left,fromthe 1960 Italian filmLaDoha Vita, anotherimago ofthis psychological state : Guests exploretherun-down interior of adecayed aristocrat's castle. Right,a paintingbythe modern Swiss artist Paul Klee entitled Fairy Tate. It illustrates a tale ofayoungmanwhosoughtand found the"bluebird of happiness." and so could marrya princess. Inmanyfairytales such a talisman isnecessarytocure illness or misfortune,symbols ofour feelings ofemptinessand futility. The realization of the shadow Whether the unconscious comes up at first in a helpful or a negative form, after a time the need usually arises to re-adapt the conscious attitude in a better way to the unconscious fac- tors -- therefore to accept what seems to be "criticism" from the imconscious. Through dreams one becomes acquainted with aspects of one's OAvn personality that for various reasons one has preferred not to look at too closely. This is what Jung called "the realization of the shado^v." (He used the term "shadow" for this unconscious part of the personality because it actually often appears in dreams in a personi- fied form.) The shadow is not the whole of the uncon- scious personality. It represents unknown or little-kno^vn attributes and qualities of the ego -- aspects that mostly belong to the personal sphere and that could just as well be conscious. In some aspects, the shadow can also consist of collective factors that stem from a source out- side the individual's personal Hfe. When an individual makes an attempt to see his shadow, he becomes a^vare of (and often ashamed of) those qualities and impulses he denies in himself but can plainly see in other people -- such things as egotism, mental laziness, and sloppiness; unreal fantasies, schemes, and plots; carelessness and cowardice; inordinate love of money and possessions -- ^in short, all the little sins about which he might previously have told himself: "That doesn't matter; nobody will notice it, and in any case other people do it too." If you feel an overwhelming rage coming up in you when a friend reproaches you about a fault, you can be fairly sure that at this point you will find a part of your shadow, of which you are unconscious. It is, of course, natural to become aimoyed when others who are "no bet- ter" criticize you because of shadow faults. But what can you say if your own dreams -- an inner judge in your own being -- ^reproach you? That is the moment when the ego gets caught, and the result is usually embarrassed silence. After- tvard the painful and lengthy work of self-edu- cation begins -- a work, we might say, that is the psychological equivalent of the labors of Hercules. This unfortunate hero's first task, you %vill remember, was to clean up in one day the Augean Stables, in which hundreds of cattlehad dropped their dung for many decades -- a task hree examples ofa "collective ifection"thatcanweld people ito an inationalmob -- andto /hichtheshadow (the darkside of 16 ego-personality) isvulnerable, eft, a scenefrom a 1961 Polish Imconcerning 17th-century rench nunswhowere "possessed ythe devii." Right, a drawing y Brueghei depictsthe affliction largeiypsychosomatic) calied ' St. itus' Dance,"whichwaswidespread ithe MiddleAges. Farrightthe ery-crossemblem ofthe Ku KIux Ian,thewhitesupremacy"secret ociety" ofAmerica'sSouthwhose icial intolerance hasoften led 3 actsofmobviolence. so enormous that the ordinary mortal %vould be overcome by discouragement at the mere thought of it. The shadow does not consist only of omis- sions. It shows up just as often in an impulsive or inadvertent act. Before one has time to think, the evil remark pops out, the plot is hatched, the wong decision is made, and one is con- fronted with results that were never intended or consciously wanted. Furthermore, theshadow is exposed to collective infections to a much greater extent than is the conscious personality. When aman is alone, for instance, he feels rela- tively all right ; but as soon as "the others" do dark, primitive things, he begins to fear that if he doesn't join in, he will be considered a fool. Thus he gives way to impulses that do not really belong to him at all. It is particularly in con- tacts with people of the same sex that one stumbles over both one's own shadow and those of other people. Although tve do see the shadow in a person of the opposite sex, we are usually much less armoyed by it and can more easily pardon it. In dreams and myths, therefore, the shadow appears as a person of the same sex as that of the dreamer. The following dream may serve as an example. The dreamer was a man of 48 who tried to live very much for and by him- self, rvorking hard and disciplining himself, re- pressing pleasure and spontaneity to a far greater extent than suited his real nature. I owned and inhabited a very big house in town, and I didn't yet know all its different parts. So I took a walk through it and discovered, mainly in the cellar, several rooms about which I knew nothing and even exits leading into other cellars or into subterranean streets. I felt uneasy when I found that several of these exits were not locked and some had no locks at all. Moreover, there were some laborers at work in the neighbor- hood who could have sneaked in. . . . When I came up again to the ground floor, I passed a back yard where again I discovered dif- ferent exits into the street or into other houses. When I tried to investigate them more closely, a man came up to me laughing loudly and calling out that we were old pals from the elementary school. I remembered him too, and while he was telling me about his life, I walked along with him tow'ard the exit and strolled with him through the streets. There was a strange chiaroscuro in the air as we walked through an enormous circular street Collection, The Museum ofModem Ait.New York and arrived at a green lawn where three gallop- ing horses suddenly passed us. They were beauti- ful, strong animals, wild but well-groomed, and they had no rider with them. (Had they run away from military service?) The maze of strange passages, chambers, and unlocked exits in the cellar recalls the old Egyptian representation of the undenvorld, which is a ivell-knoivn symbol of the uncon- scious ivith its unknoivn possibilities. It also shows hoiv one is "open" to other influences in one's unconscious shadow side, and how im- canny and alien elements can break in. The cellar, one can say, is the basement of the dreamer's psyche. In the back yard of the strange building (ivhich represents the still un- perceived psychic scope of the dreamer's person- ality) an old school friend suddenly turns up. This person obviously personifies another aspect of the dreamer himself -- an aspect that had been part of his life as a child but that he had forgotten and lost. It often happens that a per- son s childhood qualities (for instance, gaiety, irascibility, or perhaps trustfulness) suddenly disappear, and one does notknowwhere orhow they have gone. It is such a lost characteristic of the dreamer that now returns (from the back yard) and tries to make friends again. This figure probably stands for the dreamer's neglected capacity for enjoying life and for his extraverted shadow side. Butwe soon learnwhy the dreamer feels "un- easy" just before meeting this seemingly harm- less old friend. When he strolls \vith him in the street, the horses break loose. The dreamer thinks they may have escaped from military service (that is to say, from the conscious disci- pline that has hitherto characterized his life). The fact that the horses have no rider shows that instinctive drives can get away from con- scious control. In this old friend, and in the horses, all the positive force reappears that was lacking before and that tvas badly needed by the dreamer. This is a problem that often comes up when one meets one's "other side." The shadmv usu- ally contains values that are needed by consci- ousness, but that exist in a form that makes it Leh,AnxiousJourneyb'fXhs modern Italian artist de Chirico. The title and gloomy passagesofthe painting expressthe nature ofthe first contact with theunconsciouswhen the individuation process begins. The unconscious isoften symbolized by corridors, labyrinths, ormazes : Right,on apapyrus (c.1400 B.c.), theseven doors ofthe Egyptian underworld, itselfseen as a maze. Below,drawings ofthreemazes ; lefttoright, a Finnishstonemaze (BronzeAge) ; a 19th-century British turfmaze ;and a maze (in tiles) on the floorofChartres Cathedral (it could bewalked as a symbolic pilgrimagetothe Holy Land). difficult to integrate them into one's life. The passages and the large house in this dream also show that the dreamer does not yet know his own psychic dimensions and is not yet able to fill them out. The shadow in this dream is typical for an introvert (a man who tends to retire too much from outer life). In the case of an extravert, who is turned more totvard outer objects and outer life, the shadowy would look quite different. A youngman who had a very' lively tempera- ment embarked again and again on successful enterprises, ^vhile at the same time his dreams insisted that he should finish off a piece of pri- vate creative work he had begun. The follow- ing was one of those dreams : A man is lying on a couch and has pulled the cover over his face. He is a Frenchman, a des- perado who would take on any criminal job. An official is accompanying me do%vnstairs, and I know that a plot has been made ag^nst me; namely, that the Frenchman should kill me as if by chance. (That is how it would look from the outside.) He actually sneaks up behind me when we approach the exit, but I am on my guard. A tall, portly man (rather rich and influential) sud- denly leans against the wall beside me, feeling ill. I quickly grab the opportunity to kill the official by stabbing his heart. "One only notices a bit of moisture" -- this is said like a comment. Notv I am safe, for the Frenchman won't attack me since the man who gave him his orders is dead. (Prob- ably the official and the successful portly man are the same person, the latter somehow replacing the former.) The desperado represents the other side of the dreamer -- his introversion -- ^which has reached a completely destitute state. He lies on a couch (i.e., he is passive) and pulls the cover over his face because he tvants to be left alone. The official, on the other hand, and the prosper- ous pordy man (who are secredy the same per- son) personify the dreamer's successful outer re- sponsibilides and acdvities. The sudden illness of the-pordy man is connected with the fact that this dreamer had in factbecome ill several times when he had allowed his dynamic energy to ex- plode too forcibly in his external life. But this successful man has no blood in his veins -- only a sort of moisture -- which means that these ex- ternal ambitious activities of the dreamer con- tain no genuine life and no passion, but are bloodless mechanisms. Thus it would be no real loss if the portlyman were killed. At the end of the dream, the Frenchman is satisfied ; he obvi- ously represents a positive shadow figure who had turned negative and dangerous only because the conscious attitude of the dreamer did not agree with him. This dream shows us that the shadow can consist of many different elements -- ^for in- stance, of unconscious ambition (the successful portly man) and of introversion (the French- man). This particular dreamer's association to the French, moreover, was that they know how to handle love affairs very well. Therefore the two shadow figures also represent two well- known drives : power and sex. The power drive appears momentarily in a double form, both as an official and as a successful man. The official, or civil servant, personifies collective adapta- tion, whereas the successful man denotes ambi- tion ; but naturally both serve the power drive. When the dreamer succeeds in stopping this dangerous inner force, the Frenchman is sud- denly no longer hostile. In other words, the equally dangerous aspect of the sex drive has also surrendered. Obviously, the problem of the shadow plays a great role in all political conflicts. If the man who had this dream had not been sensible about his shadow problem, he could easily have iden- tified the desperate Frenchman with the "dan- gerous Communists" of outer life, or the official plus the prosperous man with the "grasping capitalists." In this way he would have avoided seeing that he had within him such warring elements. If people observe their own uncon- scious tendencies in other people, this is called a "projection." Political agitation in all coun- tries is full of such projections, just as much as the back-yard gossip of litde groups and indi- viduals. Projections of all kinds obscure our view of our fellow men, spoiling its objectivity, and thus spoiling all possibility of genuine human relationships. I "For over five years this man has been chasing around Europe like a madman in search of something he could set on fire. Unfortunately he again and again finds hirelings who open the gates of their country to this international incendiary. And there is an additional disadvantage in projecting our shadow. If we identify our o\vn shadow with, say, the Communists or the capi- talists, a part of our own personality remains on the opposing side. The result is that we shall constantly (though involuntarily) do things be- hind our o^vn backs that support this other side, and thus we shall umvittingly help our enemy. If, on the contrary, we realize the projection and can discuss matters without fear or hostility, dealing with the other person sensibly, then there is a chance of mutual understanding -- or at least of a truce. Whether the shadow becomes our friend or enemy depends largely upon ourselves. As the dreams of the unexplored house and the French desperado both show, the shadow is not neces- sarily always an opponent. In fact, he is exacdy like anyhuman being withwhom one has to get along, sometimes by giving in, sometimes by re- sisting, sometimes by giving love -- Avhatever the situation requires. The shadow becomes hostile only when he is ignored or misunderstood. Sometimes, though not often, an individual feels impelled to live out the worse side of his nature and to repress his better side. In such cases the shadotv appears as a positive figure in his dreams. But to a person who lives out his natural emotions and feelings, the shadow may appear as a cold and negative intellectual; it then personifies poisonous judgments and nega- tive thoughts that have been held back. So, tvhatever form it takes, the function of the shadotv is to represent the opposite side of the ego and to embody just those qualities that one dislikes most in other people. Ratherthanface ourdefects as revealed bytheshadow,weproject themon to others -- ^for instance, onto our political enemies.Above ieft, a postermade fora parade in CommunistChinashowsAmerica as an evil serpent (bearing Nazi swastikas) killed by a Chinese hand. Left, Hitlerduring aspeech ;the quotation is /i/s description of Churchili. Projections also flourish in maliciousgossip (right,from the British television series Coronation Street). It would be relatively easy if one could inte- grate the shadow into the conscious personality just by attempting to be honest and to use one's insight. But, unfortunately, such an attempt does not always work. There is such a passionate drive wthin the shadowy part of oneself that reason may not prevail against it. A bitter ex- perience coming from the outside may occa- sionally help ; a brick, so to speak, has to drop on one's head to put a stop to shadow drives and impulses. At times a heroic decision may serve to halt them, but such a superhuman effort is usually possible only if the Great Man within (the Self) helps the individual to carry it through. The fact that the shadow contains the over- whelming power of irresistible impulse does not mean, however, that the drive should always be heroically repressed. Sometimes the shadow is powerful because the urge of the Self is point- ing in the same direction, and so one does not know whether it is the Self or the shadow that is behind the inner pressure. In the unconscious, one is unfortunately in the same situation as in a moonlit landscape: All the contents are blurred and merge into one another, and one never knows exactly what or where anything is, or where one thing begins and ends. (This is known as the "contamination" of unconscious contents.) When Jung called one aspect of the uncon- scious personality the shadow, he was referring to a relatively well-defined factor. But some- times everything that is unknown to the ego is mixed up wth the shado\v, including even the most valuable and highest forces. Who, for in- Above,thewild white stallion from the 1953 French film Crin Blanc. Wildhorsesoften symbolizethe uncontrollable instinctive drives thatcaneruptfrom the unconscious -- andthatmany people tryto repress Inthe film,the horseand a boy formastrong attachment (though the horse still runswild with his herd). But local horsemen setout to capturethe wild horses.The stallionand hisboy riderare pursued for rniles ;finallythey arecornered onthe seashore. Ratherthan submitto capture,the boyandthe horse plunge intothe sea tobesweptaway. Symbolically, the story'sendseemsto represent an escape intothe unconscious (thesea) as awayto avoid facing reality inthe outside world. stance, could be quite sure \s'hether the French desperado in the dream I quoted was a useless tramp or a most valuable introvert? And the bolting horses of the preceding dream -- should they be allowed to run free or not? In a case ^vhen the dream itself does not make things clear, the conscious personality will have to make the decision. If the shadow figure contains valuable, vital forces, they ought to be assimilated into actual experience and not repressed. It is up to the ego to give up its pride and priggishness and to live out something that seems to be dark, but actu- ally may not be. This can require a sacrifice just as heroic as the conquest of passion, but in an opposite sense. The ethical difficulties that arise when one meets one's shadow arc \vcll described in the 18th Book of the Koran. In this tale Moses meets Khidr ("the Green One" or "first angel of God") in the desert. They ^vander along to- gether, and Khidr expresses his fear that Moses will not be able to ^vitness his deeds \s'ithout indignation. If Moses cannot bear with him and trust him, Khidr will have to leave. Presently Khidr scuttles the fishing boat of some poor villagers. Then, before Moses's eyes, he kills a handsome young man, and finally he restores the fallen rvall of a city of unbelievers. Moses cannot help expressing his indignation, and so Khidr has to leave him. Before liis de- parture, however, he explains the reasons for his actions: By scuttling the boat he actu- ally saved it for its owners because pirates were on their way to steal it. As it is, the fisher- men can salvage it. The handsome young man was on his way to commit a crime, and by kill- ing him Khidr saved his pious parents from infamy. By restoring the svall, two pious young men were saved from ruin because their trea- sure was buried under it. Moses, who had been so morally indignant, saw now (too late) that hisjudgment had been too hasty. Khidr's doings had seemed to be totally evil, but in fact they were not. Looking at this story naively, one might assume that Khidr is the lawless, capricious, evil shado\v of pious, law-abiding Moses. But this is not the case. Khidr is much more the per- sonification of some secret creative actions of the Godhead. (One can find a similar meaning in the famous Indian story of "The King and the Corpse" as interpreted by Henry Zimmer.) It is no accident that I have not quoted a dream to illustrate this subtle problem. I have chosen this well-known story from the Koran because it sums up the e.\pcrience of a lifetime, which would very rarely be expressed with such clarity in an individual dream. When dark figures turn up in our dreams and seem to ^vant something, we cannot be sure whether they personify merely a shadowy part of ourselves, or the Self, or both at the same time. Divining in advance ^vhether our dark partner s>Tnbolizes a shortcoming that \ve should overcome or a meaningful bit of life that we Theshadowcanbe saidtohavetwo aspects,onedangerous,theother valuable.The paintingofthe Hindu god Vishnu, far left,imagessuch a duality : Usuallyconsidered a benevolentgod.Vishnu hereappears in ademonic aspect,tearing aman apart. Left,from aJapanese temple (A.D.759),asculpture of Buddha alsoexpressesduality : Thegod'smanyarms holdsymbols of bothgoodand evil. Right,the doubt-stricken Martin Luther (portrayedbyAlbert Finneyinthe 1961 playit^erby Britain'sJohn Osborne) : Lutherwas neversure whether his breakfromtheChurch was inspiredbyGod orarosefrom hisown pridearid obstinacy (in symbolic terms,the "evil" side of hisshadow). should accept -- this is one of the most difficult problems that we encounter on the way to indi- viduation. Moreover, the dream symbols are often so subtle and complicated that one can- not be sure of their interpretation. In such a situation all one can do is accept the discom- fort of ethical doubt -- making no final decisions or commitments and continuing to watch the dreams. This resembles the situation of Cinder- ella when her stepmother threw a heap of good and bad peas in front of her and asked her to sort them out. Although it seemed quite hope- less, Cinderella began patiently to sort the peas, and suddenly doves (or ants, in some versions) came to help her. These creatures symbolize helpful, deeply unconscious impulses that can only be felt in one's body, as it were, and that point to a way out. Somewhere, right at the bottom of one's own being, one generally does know where one should go and what one should do. But there are times when the clown we call "I" behaves in such a distracting fashion that the inner voice cannot make its presence felt. Sometimes all attempts to understand the hints of the unconscious fail, and in such a difficulty one can only have the courage to do what seems to be right, while being ready to change course if the suggestions of the uncon- scious should suddenly point in another direc- tion. It may also happen (although this is unusual) that a person will find it better to resist the urge of the unconscious, even at the price of feeling warped by doing so, rather than depart too far from the state of being human. (This would be the situation of people who have to live out a criminal disposition in order to be completely themselves.) The strength and inner clarity needed by the ego in order to make such a decision stem secretly from the Great Man, who appar- ently does not want to reveal himself too clearly. It may be that the Self wants the ego to make a free choice, or it may be that the SeH depends on human consciousness and its decisions to help him to become manifest. When it comes to such difficult ethical problems, no one can truly judge the deeds of others. Each man has to look to his own problem and try to determine what is right for himself. As an old Zen Budd- hist Master said, we must follow the example of the cowherd who watches his ox "with a stick so that it will not graze on other people's meadows." These new discoveries of depth psychology arebound to makesome change in our collective ethical views, for they wiU compel us to judge all human actions in a much more individual and subtle way. The discovery of the uncon- scious is one of the most far-reaching discov- eries of recent times. But the fact that recognition of its unconscious reality involves honest self-examination and reorganization of one's life causes many people to continue to behave as if nothing at all has happened. It takes a lot of courage to take the unconscious seriously and to tackle the problems it raises. Most people are too indolent to think deeply about even those moral aspects of their beha- vior of which they are conscious ; they are cer- tainly too lazy to consider how the unconscious affects them.* 1 ) The anima : the woman within Difficult and subtle ethical problems are not in- variably brought up by the appearance of the shadow itself. Often another "inner figure" emerges. If the dreamer is a man, he udll dis- cover a female personification of his uncon- scious ; and it udll be a male figure in the case of a woman. Often this second symbolic figure turns up behind the shadow, bringing up new and dififerent problems. Jung called its male and female forms "animus" and "anima." The anima is a personification of all feminine psychological tendencies in a man's psyche, such as vague feehngs and moods, prophetic hunches, receptiveness to the irrational, capacity for per- sonal love, feeling for nature, and -- last but not least -- his relation to the unconscious. It is no mere chance that in olden times priestesses (like the Greek Sibyl) -vs-ere used to fathom the divine will and to make connection with the gods. A particularly good example of how the anima is experienced as an inner figure in a man's psyche is found in the medicinemen and prophets (shamans) among the Eskimo and other arctic tribes. Some of these even wear women's clothes, or have breasts depicted on their garments, in order to manifest their inner feminine side -- the side that enables them to connect with the "ghost land" (i.e., what we call the unconscious). One reported case teUs of a young man who was being initiated by an older shaman and who was buried by him in a snow hole. He fell into a state of dreaminess and exhaustion. In this coma he suddenly sa\v a ^voman who emitted light. She instructed him in all he needed to know and later, as his protective spirit, helped him to practice his difficult pro- fession by relating him to the powers of the be- Theanima (thefemaleelement in amale psyche) isoften personified asa witch ora priestess -- ^women who have iinkswith "forcesof darkness"and "the spiritworid" (i.e.,the unconscious). Left, a sorceresswithimpsanddemons (in a 17th-centuryengraving). Below, ashaman ofa Siberian tribe, who is a man dressedasawoman -- becausewomen arethought to be moreable to contact spirits. Above, awoman spiritualist or medium (fromthe 1 951 film The Medium, based on an operaby Gian Carlo Menotti).The majority of modem mediums are probably v/omen ;the belief is stillwidespread thatwomen aremore receptivethan men tothe irrational. I / / yond. Such an experience shows the anima as the personification of a man's unconscious. In its individual manifestation the character of a man's anima is as a rule shaped by his mother. If he feels that his mother had a nega- tive influence on him, his anima will often ex- press itself in irritable, depressed moods, uncertainty, insecurity, and touchiness. (If, however, he is able to overcome the negative assaults on himself, they can even serve to re- inforce his masculinity.) Within the soul of such a man the negative mother-anima figure will endlessly repeat this theme; "I am nothing. Nothingmakes any sense. With others it's diflfer- ent, but for me ... I enjoy nothing." These "anima moods" cause a sort of dullness, a fear of disease, of impotence, or of accidents. The whole of life takes on a sad and oppressive aspect. Such dark moods can even lure a man to suicide, in which case the anima becomes a death demon. She appears in this role in Cocteau's film Orphee. The Ytench eaW such an anima fignte a femme fatale. (A milder version of this dark anima is personified by the Queen of the Night in Mozart's Magic Flute.) The Greek Sirens or the German Lorelei also personify this dan- gerous aspect of the anima, which in this form symbolizes destructive hiusion. The following Siberian tale illustrates the behavior of such a destructive anima: One day a lonely hunter sees a beautiful woman emerging from the deep forest on the other side of the river. She waves at him and sings : Oh, come, lonely hunter in the stillness of dusk. Gome, come ! I miss you, I miss you ! Now I will embrace you, embrace you ! Gome, come ! My nest is near, my nest is near. Gome, come, lonely hunter, now in the stillness of dusk. He throws off his clothes and swims across the river, but suddenly she flies away in the form of an owl, laughing mockingly at him. When he tries to swim back to find his clothes, he drowns in the cold river. In this tale the anima symbolizes an unreal dream of love, happmess, andmatetnalwarmth (her nest) -- a dream that lures men away from Theanima (liketheshadow) has two aspects, benevolentand malefic (or negative). Left, ascenefrom OrpMe (a filmversion by Cocteau ofthe Orpheus myth) :Thewoman can beseen as a lethal anima, for she has led Orpheus (being carried bydark"underworld" figures) to hisdoom.Also malevolentarethe Lorelei ofTeutonicmyth (below, in a 19th-centurydrawing), water spiritswhosesinging luresmen to theirdeath. Below right, a parallelfrom Slavonic myth ;the Rusalka.These beingswerethought to be spirits ofdrowned girlswho bewitchanddrown passing men. reality. The hunter is dro^vned because he ran after a -^vishful fantasy that could not be fulfilled. Another way in -^s'hich the negative anima in a man's personality can be revealed is in waspish, poisonous, effeminate remcirks by which he devalues everything. Remarks of this sort always contain a cheap tNvisting of the truth and are in a subtle way destructive. There are legends throughout the world in which "a poison damsel" (as they call her in the Orient) appears. She is a beautiful creature who has weapons hidden in her body or a secret poison with \vhich she kills her lovers during their first night together. In this guise the anima is as cold and reckless as certain tmcanny aspects of nature itself, and in Europe is often expressed to this day by the belief in wtches. If, on the other hand, a man's experience of his mother has been positive, this can also affect his anima in typical but different ^vays, ^vith the result that he either becomes effeminate or is preyed upton by women and thus is unable to cope with the hardships of life. An anima of this sort can turn men into sentimentalists, or they may become as touchy as old maids or as sensitive as the fairy-tale princess who could feel a pea under 30 mattresses. A still more subtle manifestation of a negative anima appears in some fairy tales in the form of a princess who asks her suitors to ans^ver a series of riddles or, perhaps, to hide themselves under her nose. If they cannot give the ansivers, or if she can find them, they must die -- and she in- variably ^vins. The anima in this guise involves men in a destructive intellectual game. We can notice the effect of this anima trick in aU those neurotic pseudo-intellectual dialogues that inhi- bit a man from getting into direct touch ^\dth life and its real decisions. He reflects about life so much that he cannot live it and loses all his spontaneity and outgoing feeling. The most frequent manifestations of the anima takes the form of erotic fantasy. Men may be driven to nurse their fantasies by look- ing at films and strip-tease sho^vs, or by day- dreaming over pornographic material. This is a crude, primitive aspect of the anima, svhich Above,fourscenesfromthe1930 German film TheBlueAngel,which concerns a straight-laced professor's infatuation with a cabaretsinger, clearlya negativeanima figure. The girl uses hercharm todegrade the professor,evenmakinghim a buffoon in hercabaretact. Right, adrawing ofSalomewith thehead ofJohnthe Baptist whomshehad killedto prove her poweroverKing Herod. Above, a paintingbythe 1 5th-century Italian artist Stefano di Giovanni depicting St.Anthonyconfronted by an attractiveyoung girl. But her bat-likewings reveal thatshe is actuallyademon,one ofthemany temptations offered to St.Anthony -- and anotherembodiment ofthe deadlyanima figure. Above right, a British cinema poster advertisingthe French filmEve (1962).Thefilm isconcernedwith the exploits ofafemme fatale (played bythe French actressJeanne Moreau) -- awidelyknown term forthe "dangerous"womanwhose relationshipswithmen clearly image the nature ofthe negative anima. The following is a description (taken from the posterabove) of the central character of the film (a melodramatic description, butone that might fitmany personifications ofthe negative anima) : "Mysterious -- tantalizing -- alluring -- wanton -- but deep within her burning the violent fires that destroy a man." becomes compulsive only when a man does not sufficiently cultivate his feeling relationships -- when his feeling attitude toward life has remained infantile. All these aspects of the anima have the same tendency that we have observed in the shadow : That is, they can be projected so that they appear to the man to be the qualities of some particular woman. It is the presence of the anima that causes a man to fall suddenly in love when he sees a woman for the first time and knows at once that this is "she." In this situation, the man feels as if he has known this woman intimately for all time ; he falls for her so helplessly that it looks to outsiders like com- plete madness. Women who are of "fairy-like" character especially attract such anima projec- tions, because men can attribute almost any- thing to a creature who is so fascinatingly vague, and can thus proceed to weave fanta- sies around her. The projection of the anima in such a sud- den and passionate form as a love affair can greatly disturb a man's marriage and can lead to the so-called "human triangle," with its accompanying difficulties. A bearable solution to such a drama can be found only if the anima is recognized as an inner power. The secret aim of the unconscious in bringing about such an entanglement is to force a man to develop and to bring his own being to maturity by integrat- ing more of his unconscious personality and bringing it into his real life. But I have said enough about the negative side of the anima. There are just as many im- portant positive aspects. The anima is, for instance, responsible for the fact that a man is able to find the right marriage partner. Another function is at least equally important : When- ever a man's logical mind is incapable of dis- cerning facts that are hidden in his unconscious, the anima helps him to dig them out. Even more vital is the role that the anima plays in putting a man's mind in tune with the right inner values and thereby opening the way into more profound inner depths. It is as if an inner "radio" becomes tuned to a certain wave length that excludes irrelevancies but allows the voice of the Great Man to be heard. In establishing this inner "radio" reception, the anima takes i8o Aman'sstresson intellectualism canbedueto a negativeanima -- oftenrepresented in legendsand mythsbythefemalefigurewho asks riddlesthatmenmustanswer or die.Above, a 19th-century French painting depictsOedipus answering the Sphinx'sriddle. Left, a traditionalview ofthe demonicanima asan uglywitch -- in a 16th-centuryGermandrawing entitled"The Bewitched Groom." Theanima appears in crude, childish form inmen'seroticfantasies -- vrhichmanymen indulgethrough forms ofpornography. Below, part ofashow in amodem British strip-tease night club. In the 1953 Japanese film Ugetsu Monagatori, a man comes under the spell of a ghost princess (center, above) -- an image of a projection of the anima on to a "fairy-like" woman, producing a destructive fantasy relationship. In Macfemefiovarythe 19th-century French novelist Flaubertdescribes a "lovemadness"caused byananima projection :"By herconstantly changing moods,sometimes mystical, sometimes gay,nowtalkative,now silent,sometimes passionate, sometimes superior -- sheknewhow toevokeathousanddesires in him, athousand instinctsand memories. Shewasthe belovedoneof all novels,the heroine of ali plays, the 'she' of all poemshe had ever read.On hershouldershefound the'amberglow' ofthe bathing Odalisque ;she hadthe long waist ofladies inthe chivalricage ; she also looked like 'the pale lady of Barcelona' ; butshewasalways an angel." Left,Emma Bovary (in the 1949 film ofthe novel) with herhusband (left) and lover. nized more dearly than before. During this period, the knightly cult of the lady signified an attempt to differentiate the feminine side of man's nature in regard to the outer ts'oman as tvell as in relation to the inner world. The lady to ^\'hose service the knight pledged himself, and for tvhom he performed his heroic deeds, ^vas naturally a personification of the anima. The name of the carrier of the Grail, in 'Wolfram von Eschenbach's version of the legend, is especially significant : Conduir-amour ("guide in love matters"). She taught the hero to differentiate both his feelings and his be- hador toward women. Later, however, this in- dividual and personal effort of developing the relationship -adth the anima \vas abandoned when her sublime aspect fused with the figure of the "Virgin, tvho then became the object of boundless devotion and praise. 'When the anima, as Virgin, was conceived as being all-positive, her negative aspects found expression in the belief in witches. In China the figure parallel to that of Mary is the goddess Kwan-Yin. A more popular Aconnection betweenthe motif of fourandtheanima appearsabovein a painting bytheSwiss artist Peter Birkhauser.Afour-eyedanima appearsasan overwhelming,terrifying vision.Thefoureyeshaveasymbolic significance similarto thatofthe 1 6 pictures in thedreamquotedon p. 182:TheyaIiudetothefactthat theanima containsthe possibility ofachieving wholeness. In the painting, right, by the modern artist Slavko, the Self is separate from the anima but still merged with nature. The painting can be called a "soul landscape" : On the left sits a dark-skinned, naked woman -- the anima. On the right is a bear, the animal soul or instinct. Near the anima is a double tree -- symbolizing the individuation process in which the inner opposites unite. In the background one at first sees a glacier, but on looking closely one sees that it is also a face. This face (from which the life- stream flows) is the Self. It has four eyes, and looks something like an animal, because it comes from instinctive nature. (The painting thus provides a good example of the way an unconscious symbol can inadvertently find its way into a fantasy landscape.) Chinese anima-figure is the "Lady of the Moon," who bestows the gift of poetry or music on her favorites and can even give them im- mortality. In India the same archetype is repre- sented by Shakti, Parvati, Rati, and many others; among the Moslems she is chiefly Fatima, the daughter of Mohammed. Worship of the anima as an officially recog- nized religious figure brings the serious disad- vantage that she loses her individual aspects. On the other hand, if she is regarded as an exclusively personal being, there is the danger that, if she is projected into the outer world, it is only there that she can be found. This latter state of affairs can create endless trouble, be- cause man becomes either the victim of his erotic fantasies or compulsively dependent on one actual woman. Only the painful (but essentially simple) de- cision to take one's fantasies and feelings seri- ously can at this stage prevent a complete stag- nation of the inner process of individuation, because only in this way can a man discover what this figure means as an inner reality. Thus the anima becomes again what she originally was -- the "woman within," who conveys the vital messages of the Self. Medieval Europe's idea of "courtly love"was influenced bytheworship oftheVirgin Mary: Ladiestowhom knightspledged lovewere believed to beaspureasthe Virgin (of whom a typical medieval imagewas the doll-like carving,top ofpage, c. 1400).On a 15th-centuty shield, far left, a knight kneelsto his lady,with death behind him.This idealizedview ofwoman produced an opposing view :the belief in witches. Left, a 1 9th-century painting ofa witches' sabbath. Whentheanima is projectedon to an "official" personification,she tendsto fall apart into adouble aspect,such as Maryand witch. Left,anotheropposing duality (from a 15th-century manuscript) ; personifications ofthe Church (on,the right, identifiedwith Mary) and oftheSynagogue (here identifiedwith the sinful Eve). The animus: the man within The male personification of the unconscious in woman -- ^the animus -- exhibits both good and bad aspects, as does the anima in man. But the animus does not so often appear in the form of an erotic fantasj' or mood; it is more apt to take the form of a hidden "sacred" comdction. tVhen such a conviction is preached wth a loud, insistent, masculine voice or imposed on others by means of brutal emotional scenes, the underlying masculinity in a woman is easily recognized. However, even in a woman %vho is outwardly very' feminine the animus can be an equally hard, inexorable power. One may sud- denly find oneself up against something in a woman that is obstinate, cold, and completely inaccessible. One of the favorite themes that the animus repeats endlessly in the luminations of this land of woman goes like this: "The only thing in the tvorld that I want is love -- and he doesn't love me" ; or "In this situation there are only two possibilities -- and both are equally bad." (The animus never believes in exceptions.) One can rarely contradict an animus opinion be- cause it is usually right in a general ^\•ay; yet it seldom seems to fit the indiHdual situation. It is apt to be an opinion that seems reasonable but beside the point. Just as the character of a man's anima is shaped by his mother, so the animus is basically influenced by a ^voman's father. The father endows his daughter's animus ^v^th the special coloring of unarguable, incontestably "true" comdctions -- comdctions that never include the personal reahty of the %voman herself as she actually is. This is why the animus is sometimes, like the anima, a demon of death. For example, in a gyps)' fairy tale a handsome stranger is received by a lonely woman in spite of the fact that she has had a dream warning her that he is the king of the dead. After he has been with her for a time, she presses him to tell her tvho he really is. At first he refuses, saving that she will Above,Joan ofArc (playedby Ingrid Bergman inthe 1948 film),whose animus -- ^themale side ofthefemale psyche -- tooktheform ofa "sacred conviction." Righttwoimagesof the negativeanimus : a 1 6th-century painting ofawomandancingwith death ;and (froma manuscript c. 1500) Hadeswith Persephone,whom heabductedtothe underworld. Heathcliff,the sinister protagonist ofthe British author Emily Bronte's novel, WutheringHeights (1 847), is partlya negative,demonicanimus figure -- probablya manifestation of Emily Bronte'sown animus. Inthe montageabove, Heathcliff (played by Laurence Olivier inthe 1939 film) confronts Emily (a portrait by herbrother) ; inthe background, Wuthering Heights as it istoday. Two examples ofdangerousanimus figures ; Left,an illustration (by the 19th-century French artist Gustave Dor6) tothe folk tale of Bluebeard. Here Bluebeardwarns his wife againstopening a certain door. (Ofcourse,shedoesso -- and finds the corpsesof Bluebeard'sformer wives.She iscaught,andjoins her predecessors.) Right, a 19th- century painting ofthe highwayman Claude Duval,whooncerobbed a ladytravelerbutgave his bootyback on thecondition thatshedance with himbythe roadside. V die if he tells her. She insists, however, and suddenly he reveals to her that he is death himself. The woman immediately dies of fright. Viewed mythologically, tlic beautiful stran- ger is probably a pagan father-image or god- image, tvho appears here as king of the dead (like Hades's abduction of Persephone). But psychologicaJly he represents a particular form of the animus that lures women atvay from all human relationships and especially from all contacts tvith real men. He personifies a cocoon of dreamy thoughts, filled \srth desire and judg- ments about how tilings "ought to be," ivhich art a woman off from the reality of life. The negative animus does not appear only as a death-demon. In mytlis and fairy talcs he plays the role of robber and murderer. One example is Bluebeard, who secretly kills all his ini'cs in a hidden chamber. In this form the animus personifies all those semiconscious, cold, destructive reflections that in\*adc a woman in the small hours, especially when she has failed to realize some obligation of feeling. It is then that she begins to think about the family herit- age and matters of that kind -- a sort of web of calculating thoughts, filled with malice and in- trigue, uhich get her into a state tvhere she even wishes death to others. ("When one of us dies, I'll move to tlie Ririera," said a ivoman to her husband ivhen she satv the beautiful Mediterranean coast -- a thought that was ren- dered relatively harmless by reason of tlie fact that she said it !) By nursing secret destructive attitudes, a i\'ifc can drive her husband, and a mother her chil- dren, into illness, accident, or even death. Or she may decide to keep the children from marrying -- a deeply hidden form of c\il that rarely comes to the surface of the mother's con- scious mind. (.\ naive old woman once said to me, while showing me a picture of her son, who was drowned when he was 27 : "I prefer it tliis way; it's better than giring him away to an- other woman.'') A strange passirity and paralysis of all feel- ing, or a deep insecurity that can lead almost to a sense of nullity, may sometimes be the result of an unconscious animus opinion. In the depths of the woman's being, the animus wliis- pers : "You arc hopeless. \S'hat's the use of trying? There is no point in doing anything. Life will never change for the better." Theanimus is often personified as agroup ofmen.Anegativegroup animusmightappearasadangerous bandofcriminals likethe wreckers (above, inan 1Sth-century Italian painting)whoonce luredships onto rocks v/ith lights, killed survivors, and tootedthe svrecks. Afrequent personification ofthe negativegroupanimus inwomen's dreams hasbeen theband ofromantic butdangerousoutlaws. Above, an ominousgroup ofbanditsfromthe 1953 Brazilian film The Bandit, concerning an adventurouswoman schoolteacherwho falls in love with a bandit leader. Below,an illustration by Fuseli of Shakespeare'sMidsummerNight's Dream.The fairyqueen has been caused (bymagic) to fall in love with a peasantwho has been given an ass'shead, also by magic.This isacomictwistonthetales in which a girl's love releases aman from a magic spell. Unfortunately, ^vhenever one of these per- sonifications of the unconscious takes possession of our mind, it seems as ifwe ourselves are hav- ing such thoughts and feelings. The ego identi- fies -with them to the point \vhere it is unable to detach them and see them for what they are. One is really "possessed" by the figure from the unconscious. Only after the possession has fallen away does one realize ^vith horror that one has said and done things diametrically opposed to one's real thoughts and feelings -- that one has been the prey of an alien psychic factor. Like the anima, the animus does not merely consist of negative qualities such as brutality, recklessness, empty talk, and silent, obstinate, evil ideas. He too has a very positive and valu- able side ; he too can build a bridge to the Self through his creative activity. The following dream of a woman of 45 may help to illustrate this point ; Two veiled figures climb onto the balcony and into the house. They are s%vathed in black hooded coats, and they seem to ^rant to torment me and my sister. She hides under the bed, but they pull her out ^vith a broom and torture her. Then it is my turn. The leader of the two pushes me against the svall, making magical gestures before my face. In the meantime his helper makes a sketch on the wall, and when I see it, I say (in order to seem friendly), "Oh ! But this is well drawn !" Now suddenly my tormenter has the noble head of an artist, and he says proudly, "Yes, indeed," and begins to clean his spectacles. Above left,thesinger Franz Grass inthe title role ofWagner'sopera TheFlyingDutchman,basedonthe tale ofthesea cpataindoomedto sail aghostship until awoman's love breaksthe curseon him. Inmanymythsawoman's lover is a figure ofmysterywhomshemust nevertryto see. Left, a 15th- centuryengraving ofan example from Greekmyth :Themaiden Psyche, lovedby Erosbutforbidden totry to look athim. Eventuallyshe did soand he left her ;shewasable to regain his love onlyaftera long search and much suffering. The sadistic aspect of these two figures was well knotvn to the dreamer, for in reality she frequently suffered bad attacks of anxiety dur- ing which she was haunted by the thought that people she loved tvere in great danger -- or even that they were dead. But the fact that the ani- mus figure in the dream is double suggests that the burglars personify a psychic factor that is dual in its effect, and that could be something quite different from these tormenting thoughts. The sister of the dreamer, who runs away from the men, is caught and tortured. In reality this sister died when fairly young. She had been artistically gifted, but had made very Uttle use of her talent. Next the dream reveals that the veiled burglars are actually disguised artists, and that if the dreamer recognizes their gifts (which are her own), they tsdll give up their evil intentions. ^Vhat is the deeper meaning of the dream? It is that behind the spasms of anxiety there is indeed a genuine and mortal danger ; but there is also a creative possibility for the dreamer. She, like the sister, had some talent as a painter, but she doubted whether painting could be a meaningful activity for her. Now her dream tells her in the most earnest way that she must live out this talent. If she obeys, the destruc- tive, tormenting animus will be transformed into a creative and meaningful activity. As in this dream, tlie animus often appears as a group of men. In this way the imconscious symbolizes the fact that the animus represents a collective rather than a personal element. Because of tliis collective-mindedness women habitually refer (when their animus is speaking through them) to "one" or "they" or "every- body," and in such circumstances their speech frequently contains the words "always" and "should" and "ought." A vast number of myths and fairy tales tell of a prmce, turned by ^vitchcraft into a wild ani- mal or monster, ^vho is redeemed by the love of a girl -- a process symbolizing the manner in which the animus becomes conscious. (Dr. Hen- derson has commented on the significance of this "Beauty and the Beast" motif in the pre- ceding chapter.) Very often the heroine is not >93 allowed to ask questions about her mysterious, unknown lover and husband ; or she meets him only in the dark and may never look at him. The implication is that, by blindly trusting and loving him, she will be able to redeem her bridegroom. But this never succeeds. She always breaks her promise and finally finds her lover again only after a long, difficult quest and much suffering. The parallel in life is that the conscious atten- tion a woman has to give to her animus prob- lem takes much time and involves a lot of suf- fering. But if she realizes who and what her animus is and what he does to her, and if she faces these realities instead of allowing herself to be possessed, her animus can turn into an invaluable inner companion who endows her with the masculine qualities of initiative, cour- age, objectivity, and spiritual wisdom. The animus, just like the anima, exhibits four stages of development. He first appears as a personification of mere physical power -- for instance, as an athletic champion or "muscle man." In the next stage he possesses initiative and the capacity for planned action. In the third phase, the animus becomes the "word," often appearing as a professor or clergyman. Finally, in his fourth manifestation, the animus is the incarnation of meaning. On this highest level he becomes (like the anima) a mediator of the religious experience whereby life acquires new meaning. He gives the woman spiritual firmness, an invisible inner support that com- pensates for her outer softness. The animus in his most developed form sometimes connects the woman's mind with the spiritual evolution Embodiments ofthefour stages oftheanimus: First, the wholly physicalman -- ^the fictional jungle heroTarzan (top, played by JohnnyWeismuller). Second, the "romantic"man -- the 1 9th-century British poet Shelley (center left) ; orthe"man ofaction" -- America's Ernest Hemingway,war hero, hunter, etc. Third,the bearer ofthe"word" -- Lloyd George,the great political orator. Fourth,thewise guide to spiritual truth -- often projected ontoGandhi (left). Above right, an Indian miniature of a girl gazing with love at a man's portrait. A woman falling in love with a picture (or a film star) is clearly projecting her animus onto the man. The actor Rudolph Valentino (right, in a film made in 1922) became the focus of animus projection for thousands of women while he lived -- and even after he died. Far right, part of the immense floral tribute sent by women all over the world to Valentino's funeral in 1926. of her age, and can thereby make her even more receptive than a man to new creative ideas. It is for this reason that in earlier times women were used by many nations as diviners and seers. The creative boldness of their posi- tive animus at times expresses thoughts and ideas that stimulate men to new enterprises. The "inner man" rvithin a woman's psyche can lead to marital troubles similar to those mentioned in the section on the anima. What makes things especially complicated is the fact that the possession of one partner by the animus (or anima) may automatically exert such an irritating effect upon the other that he (or she) becomes possessed too. Animus and anima always tend to drag conversation do'(\'n to a vtr)' low level and to produce a disagreeable, irascible, emotional atmosphere. As I mentioned before, the positive side of the animus can personify an enterprising spirit, courage, truthfulness, and in the highest form, spiritual profundity. Through him a woman can experience the underljdng processes of her cultural and personal objective situation, and can find her way to an intensified spiritual atti- tude to life. This naturally presupposes that her animus ceases to represent opinions that are above criticism. The woman must find the courage and inner broadmindedness to question the sacredness of her or\m convictions. Only then tvill she be able to take in the suggestions of tlie imconscious, especially ts'hen they con- tradict her animus opinions. Only then will the manifestations of the Self get through to her, and trill she be able consciously to understand their meaning. The Self : symbols of totality If an individual has wrestled seriously enough and long enough with the anima (or animus) problem so that he, or she, is no longer partially identified with it, the unconscious again changes its dominant character and appears in a new symbolic form, representing the Self, the inner- most nucleus of the psyche. In the dreams of a woman this center is usually personified as a superior female figure -- a priestess, sorceress, earth mother, or goddess of nature or love. In the case of a man, it manifests itself as a mas- culine initiator and guardian (an Indian guru), a wise old man, a spirit of nature, and so forth. Two folk tales Illustrate the role that such a figure can play. The first is an Austrian tale : A king has ordered soldiers to keep the night watch beside the corpse of a black princess, who has been bewitched. Every midnight she rises and kills the guard. At last one soldier, whose turn it is to stand guard, despairs and runs away into the woods. There he meets an "old guitarist who is our Lord Himself." This old musician tells him where to hide in the church and instructs him on how to behave so that the black princess can- not get him. With this divine help the soldier actually manages to redeem the princess and marry her. Clearly, "the old guitarist who is our Lord Himself" is, in psychological terms, a symbolic personification of the Self. With his help the ego avoids destruction and is able to overcome -- and even redeem -- a highly dangerous aspect of his anima. In a woman's psyche, as I have said, the Self assumes feminine personifications. This is illus- trated in the second story, an Eskimo tale : A lonely girl who has been disappointed in love meets a wizard traveling in a copper boat. He is the "Spirit of the Moon," who has given all the animals to mankind and who also bestows luck in hunting. He abducts the girl to the heavenly realm. Once, when the Spirit of the Moon has left her, she visits a little house near the Moon Ghost's mansion. There she finds a tiny woman clothed in the "intestinal membrane of the bearded seal," who warns the heroine against the Spirit of the Moon, saying that he plans to kill her. (It appears that he is a killer of women, a sort of Bluebeard.) The tiny woman fashions a long rope by means of which the girl can descend to earth at the time of the new moon, which is the moment when the little woman can weaken the Moon Spirit. The girl climbs down, but when she arrives on earth, she does not open her eyes as quickly as the little woman told her to. Because of this, she is turned into a spider and can never become human again. As we have noted, the divine musician in the first tale is a representation of the "wise old man," a typical personification of the Self. He is akin to the sorcerer Merlin of medieval legend or to the Greek god Hermes. The little woman in her strange membrane-clothing is a parallel figure, symbolizing the Self as it appears in the feminine psyche. The old musi- cian saves the hero from the destructive anima, and the little woman protects the girl against the Eskimo "Bluebeard" (who is, in the form of the Moon Spirit, her animus). In this case, how- ever, things go wrong -- a point that I shall t^e up later. The Self, however, does not always take the form of a wise old man or wise old woman. These paradoxical personifications are attempts to express something that is not entirely con- tained in time -- ^something simultaneously young and old. The dream of a middle-aged man shows the Self appearing as a youngman : Coming from the street, a youth rode down into our garden. (There were no bushes and no fence as there are in real life, and the garden lay open.) I did not quite know if he came on pur- pose, or if the horse carried him here against his will. I stood on the path that leads to my studio and watched the arrival with great pleasure. The sight The Self -- theinnercenter ofthe total psyche -- is often personified in dreamsasa superiorhuman figure.Towomen,the Selfmight appearas awiseand powerfui goddess -- liketheancient Greek mothergoddess Demeter (right, shown with hersonTriptolemus and daughter Kore, in a fifth- century B.c. relief).The "fairy godmother" ofmany tales is aiso a symbolic personification ofthe female Self : above, Cinderella's godmother (froman illustration byGustave Dor6). Below, a helpful oldwoman (also a fairygodmother) rescues a girl in an illustration of a Hans ChristianAnderson tale. Personifications of the Self in men's dreams often take the form of "wise old men." Far left, the magician Merlin of the Arthurian legends (in a 14th-century English manuscript). Center, a guru (wise man) from an 1 8th-century Indian painting. Left, a painting by Dr. Jung of a personification that appeared in one of his dreams: a winged old man who carried keys and who, Jung says, represented "superior insight." The Self usuallyappears in dreams at crucialtimes in the dreamer's life -- ^turning pointswhen his basic attitudesandwholeway of life are changing.Thechange itself is oftensymbolized bythe action of crossing water.Above,an actual rivercrossing thataccompanied an importantupheaval : George Washington's crossing ofthe Delaware riverduringtheAmerican Revolution (in a 1 9th-century American painting). Left, another majoreventthat involved crossing water ;the firstattacklaunched againstthe Normandybeacheson D day,June 1944. The Self is notalways personified asa superioro/dperson. Left, a painting (ofadream) by Peter Blrkhauser, inwhich the Self appearsasa marvelousyouth. Whilethe artistwasworkingon the painting,otherassociationsand ideascameupfrom hisunconscious. Theround object like asun behind theyouth is asymbol oftotality, andthe boy'sfourarms recall other "fourfold" symbolsthat characterize psychologicalwholeness. Beforethe boy'shands hoveraflower -- as if he need only raise hishandsand a magicalflowerwill appear. He is blackbecause of his nocturnal (i.e., unconscious) origin. of the boy on his beautiful horse impressed me deeply. The horse ts-as a small, wild, powerful animal, a sjTnbol of energy (it resembled a boar), and it had a thick, bristly, silvery-grey coat. The boy rode past me between the studio and house, jumped off his horse, and led him carefully away so that he would not trample on the flower bed with its beautiful red and orange tulips. The flower bed had been newly made and planted by my wife (a dream occurrence). This youth signifies the Self, and tv'ith it re- newal of life, a creative elan vital, and a new spiritual orientation by means of which ever)'- thing becomes full of life and enterprise. If a man devotes himself to the instructions of his own unconscious, it can bestow this gift, so that suddenly life, which has been stale and duU, turns into a rich, unending inner adven- ture, full of creative possibilities. In a tvoman's ps)'chology, this same youthful personification', of the Self can appear as a supematimally gifted girl. The dreamer in this instance is a woman in her late forties : I stood in front of a church and was washing the pavement with water. Then I ran down the street just at the moment when the smdents from the high school were let out. I came to a stagnant river across which a board or tree trunk had been laid; but when I was attempting to walk across, a mischievous student boimced on the board so that it cracked and I nearly fell into the water. "Idiot !" I yelled out. On the other side of the river three little girls were playing, and one of them stretched out her hand as if to help me. I thought that her small hand was not strong enough to help me, but when I took it, she suc- ceeded, without the slightest effort, in pulling me across and up the bank on the other side. The dreamer is a religious person, but according to her dream she cannot remain in the Church (Protestant) any longer ; in fact, she seems to have lost the possibility of entering it, although she tries to keep the access to it as clean as she can. According to the dream, she must now cross a stagnant river, and this indi- cates that the flow' of life is slowed dotvn because of the unresolved religious problem. (Crossing a river is a frequent sj'mbolic image for a fimdamental change of attitude.) The student was interpreted by the dreamer herself as the personification of a thought that she had previously had -- namely, that she might satisfy her spiritual yearning by attending high school. Obviously the dream does not think much of this plan. 'When she dares to cross the river alone, a personification of the Self (the girl), small but supematurally powerful, helps her. But the form of a human being, whether youthful or old, is only one of the many ways in which the Self can appear in di'eams or visions. The various ages it assumes show not only that it is with us throughout the whole of life, but also that it exists beyond the con- • 9.0 Manypeopletoday personifythe Self in theirdreamsas prominent public figures.Jungian psychologists find that, in men'sdreams. Dr. Albert Schweitzer (far left) and SirWinston Churchill (left) often appear ; inwomen'sdreams. Eleanor Roosevelt (right) and Queen Elizabeth (far right, a portrait on an African house). sciously realized flow of life -- ^which is what creates our experience of time. Just as the Self is not entirely contained in our conscious experience of time (in our space- time dimension), it is also simultaneously omni- present. Moreover, it appears frequently in a form that hints at a special omnipresence ; that is, it manifests itself as a gigantic, symbolic human being who embraces and contains the whole cosmos. When this image turns up in the dreams of an individual, we may hope for a creative solution to his conflict, because now the vital psychic center is activated (i.e., the whole being is condensed into oneness) in order to overcome the difficulty. It is no wonder that this figure of the Cosmic Man appears in many myths and religious teachings. Generally he is described as some- thing helpful and positive. He appears as Adam, as the Persian Gayomart, or as the Hindu Purusha. This figure may even be des- cribed as the basic principle of the whole world. The ancient Chinese, for instance, thought that before anything whatever was created, there was a colossal divine man called P'an Ku who gave heaven and earth their form. When he cried, his tears made the Yellow River and the Yangtze River; when he breathed, the ^vind rose ; when he spoke, thunder was loosed ; and when he looked around, lightning flashed. If he was in a good mood, the weather was fine; if he was sad, it clouded over. When he died, he fell apart, and from his body the five holy mountains of China sprcing into existence. His head became the T'ai mountain in the East, his trunkbecame the Sung moimtain in the cen- ter, his right arm the Heng mountain in the North, his left arm the Heng mountain in the South, and his feet the Hua mountain in the West. His eyes became the sun and moon. We have already seen that symbolic struc- tures that seem to refer to the process of indi- viduation tend to be based on the motif of the number four -- such as the four functions of consciousness, or the four stages of the anima or animus. It reappears here in the cosmic shape of P'an Ku. Only under specific circum- stances do other combinations of numbers appear in the psychic material. The natural un- hampered manifestations of the center are characterized by fourfoldness -- that is to say, by having four divisions, or some other structure deriving from the numerical series of 4, 8, 16, and so on. Number 16 plays a particularly im- portant role, since it is composed of four fours. In our Western civilization, similar ideas of a Cosmic Man have attached themselves to the symbol of Adam, the First Man. There is a Jewish legend that when God created Adam, he first gathered red, black, white, and yellow dust from the four comers of the world, and thusAdam "reached from one end of the world to the other." When he bent down, his head was in the East and his feet in the West, According to another Jewish tradition, the whole of mankind was contained inAdam from the beginning, which meant the soul of every- body who would ever be bom. The soul of Adam, therefore, was "like the wick of a lamp composed of innumerable strands." In this symbol the idea of a total oneness of all human existence, beyond all individual imits, is clearly expressed. In ancient Persia, the same original First Man -- called Gayomart -- was depicted as a huge figure emitting light. When he died, every kind of metal sprang from his body, and from his soul came gold. His semen fell upon the earth, and from it came the first human couple in the form of two rhubarb shmbs. It is striking N! WM s % 7m CosmicMan -- thegigantic, all- embracingfigure that personifiesand containsthe entire universe -- isa common representation ofthe Self in mythsand dreams. Left,the title page oiLeviathan, bythe 1 7th-century English philosopherThomas Hobbes. Thegiganticfigure of Leviathan ismade up of allthe people ofthe "commonwealth" -- Hobbes's ideal society, inwhichthe peoplechoose theirown central authority (or "sovereign," hence Leviathan's crown, sword,and scepter).Above, thecosmicfigure ofancient China's P'an Ku -- shown covered in leavesto indicate thatCosmicMan (or First Man) simply existed, like a plant,grown in nature. Below, on a leaffroman 18th-century Indian illuminated manuscript,the Cosmic Lion Goddess holding the sun (the lion ismade up ofmany peopleandanimals). ov S h: n Df r? r- w that the Chinese P'an Ku was also depicted covered by leaves like a plant. Perhaps this is because the First Man was thought of as a self- grown, living unit that just existed without any animal impulse or self-will. Among a group of people who live on the banks of the Tigris, Adam is still, at the present time, worshiped as the hidden "super-soul" or mystical "protective spirit" of the entire human race. These people say that he came from a date palm -- another repetition of the plant motif. In the East, and in some gnostic circles in the West, people soon recognized that the Cosmic Man w^ more an inner psychic image than a concrete outer reality. According to Hindu tradition, for instance, he is something that lives within the individual human being and is the only part that is immortal. This inner Great Man redeems the individual by leading him out of creation and its sufferings, back into his original eternal sphere. But he can do this only if man recognizes him and rises from his sleep in order to be led. In the symbolic myths of old India, this figure is known as the Purusha, a name that simply means "man" or "per- son." The Purusha lives within the heart of every individual, and yet at the same time he fills the entire cosmos. According- to the testimony of many myths, the Cosmic Man is not only the beginning but also the final goal of all life -- of the whole of creation. "All cereal nature means wheat, all treasure nature means gold, all generation means man," says the medieval sage Meister Eckhart. And if one looks at this from a psy- chological standpoint, it is certainly so. The whole inner psychic reality of each individual is ultimately oriented toward this archetypal symbol of the Self. In practical terms this means that the exist- ence of human beings will never be satisfactorily explained in terms of isolated instincts or pur- posive mechanism such as hunger, power, sex, survival, perpetuation of the species, and so on. That is, man's main purpose is not to eat, drink, etc., but to be human. Above and beyond these drives, our inner psychic reality serves to mani- fest a living mystery that can be expressed only by a symbol, and for its expression the uncon- scious often chooses the powerful image of the Cosmic Man. In our Western civilization the Cosmic Man has been identified to a great extent with Christ, and in the East with Krishna or with Buddha. In the Old Testament this same symbolic figure turns up as the "Son of Man" and in later Jewish mysticism is called Adam Kadmon. Certain religious movements of late antiquity simply called him Anthropos (the Greek word for man). Like all symbols this image points to Top left, a Rhodesian rock painting of a creation myth, in whichthe FirstMan (the moon) mateswith the morning starand evening star to producethe creatures of earth. CosmicMan often appears asan Adam-like originalman -- and Christ, too, hasbecome identified with this personification ofthe Self : Top right, a paintingbythe 15th - centuryGerman artist Griinewald showsthe figure of Christwith allthemajestyofCosmic Man. an unknowable secret -- to the ultimateunknown meaning of human existence. As we have noted, certain traditions assert that the Cosmic Man is the goal of creation, but the achievement of this should not be under- stood as a possible external happening. From the point of ^•ie^v of the Hindu, for example, it is not so much that the external world tsill one day dissolve into the original Great Man, but that the ego's extraverted orientation toward the external world will disappear in order to make way for the Cosmic Man. This happens when the ego merges into the Self. The ego's discursive flow of representations (which goes from one thought to another) and its desires (which run from one object to another) cahn do^^Tl \vhen the Great Man tnthin is encount- ered. Indeed, tve must never forget that for us outer reality e-xists only in so far as we perceive it consciously, and that tve cannot prove that it exists "in and by itself." The many examples coming from various civilizations and different periods sho\v the uni- Examplesofthe "royal couple" (a symbolicimage ofpsychic totality andthe Selfl : left,a third-century A.D. Indian sculptureofSivaand Parvati,hermaphroditicallyjoined ; below,the Hindu deities Krishna and Radha inagrove. TheGreekhead, below left,was shown by Dr.Jung to besubtlytwo sided (i.e., hermaphroditic). In a lettertotheownerJungadded thatthe head "has, like hisanalogs Adonis,Tammuz, and... Baldur, all thegraceandcharm of eithersex." Right, a pre-Roman sculpture ofthe Celtic bear-goddess Artio,found at Berne (which means "bear")- Shewas probably a mothergoddess, resemblingtheshe-bear in the dream quoted on this page. Further correspondences to symbolic images in thisdream : Center, Australian aborigineswith their"sacred stones,"whichthey believe contain the spirits ofthe dead. Bottom, from a 17th-centuryalchemical manuscript, the symbolic royal couple as a pairof lions. versality of the symbol of the Great Man. His image is present in the minds of men as a sort of goal or expression of the basic mystery of our life. Because this symbol represents that which is whole and complete, it is often con- ceived of as a bisexual being. In this form the symbol reconciles one of the most important pairs of psychological opposites -- male and female. This union also appears frequently in dreams as a divine, royal, or othenvise distin- guished couple. The following dream of a man of 47 shows this aspect of the Self in a dra- matic way : I am on a platform, and below me I see a huge, black, beautiful she-bear with a rough but well- groomed coat. She is standing on her hind legs, and on a stone slab she is polishing a flat oval black stone, which becomes increasingly shiny. Not far away a lioness and her cub do the same thing, but the stones they are polishing are bigger and round in shape. After a while the she-bear turns into a fat, naked woman with black hair and dark, fiery eyes. I behave in an erotically pro- vocative way toward her, and suddenly she moves nearer in order to catch me. I get frightened and take refuge up on the building of scaffolding where I was before. Later I am in the midst of many women, half of whom are primitive and have rich black hair (as if they are transformed from animals); the other half are our women [of the same nationality as the dreamer] and have blonde or brown hair. The primitive women sing a very sentimental song in melancholy, high- pitched voices. Now, in a high elegant carriage, there comes a young man who wears on his head a royal golden crown, set with shining rubies -- 204 adcorpusruum< a very beautiful sight. Beside him sits a blonde young woman, probably his wife, but without a crown. It seems that the lioness and her cub have been transformed into this couple. They belong to the group of primitives. Now all the women (the primitives and the others) intone a solemn song, and the royal carriage slowly travels to^va^d the horizon. Here the inner nucleus of the dreamer's psyche shotvs itself at first in a temporary vision of the royal couple, 'which emerges from the depths of his animal nature and the primitive layer of his unconscious. The she-bear in the beginning is a sort of mother goddess. (Artemis, for instance, tvas worshiped in Greece as a she- bear.) The dark oval stone that she rubs and polishes probably symbolizes the dreamer's in- nermost being, his true personality. Rubbing and polishing stones is a well-known, exceed- ingly ancient acti'vity of man. In Europe "holy" stones, wrapped in bark and hidden in caves, have been found in many places ; as containers of divine potvers they tvere probably kept there by men of the Stone Age. At the present time some of the Australian aborigines believe that their dead ancestors continue to exist in stones as virtuous and divine powers, and that if they rub these stones, the potver increases (like charg- ing them with electricity) for the benefit of both the li-ving and the dead. The man who had the dream wc are discus- sing had hitherto refused to accept a marital bond with a woman. His fear of being caught by this aspect of life caused him, in the dream, to flee from the bear-woman to the spectator's platform svhere he could passively watch things ^vithout becoming entangled. Through the motif ,of the stone being rubbed by the bear, the unconscious is trying to show him that he should let himself come into contact with this side of life; it is through the frictions of married life that his inner being can be shaped and polished. When the stone is polished, it will begin to shine like a mirror so that the bear can see her- self in it; this means that only by accepting earthly contact and suffering can the human soul be transformed into a mirror in which the divine powers can perceive themselves. But the In dreams a mirrorcan symbolize the power ofthe unconscious to "mirror"the individual objectively -- giving him aviewofhimselfthat hemayneverhavehad before. Only through the unconsciouscansuch a view (which oftenshocksand upsets the conscious mind) be obtained -- justas in Greekmyththe Gorgon Medusa,whose lookturnedmen to stone, could begazed upon only in a mirror. Right, Medusa reflected inashield (a painting bythe17th- century artist Caravaggio). dreamer runs away to a higher place -- i.e., into all sorts of reflections by which he can escape the demands of life. The dream then shows him that if he runs away from the demands of life, one part of his soul (his anima) will remain undifferentiated, a fact symbolized by the group of nondescript women that splits apart into a primitive half and a more civilized one. The lioness and her son, tvhich then appear on the scene, personify the mysterious urge to- ward individuation, indicated by their work at shaping the round stones. (A round stone is a symbol of the Self.) The lions, a royal couple, are in themselves a symbol of totality. In medie- val symbolism, the "philosopher's stone" (a pre-eminent symbol of man's wholeness) is re- presented as a pair of lions or as a human couple riding on lions. Symbolically, this points to the fact that often the urge toward individu- ation appears in a veiled form, hidden in the overwhelming passion one may feel for another person. (In fact, passion that goes beyond the natural measure of love ultimately aims at the mystery of becoming whole, and this is why one feels, when one has fallen passionately in love, that becoming one with the other person is the only worthwhile goal of one's life.) As long as the image of totality in this dream expresses itself in the form of a pair of lions, it is still contained in some such overwhelming passion. But when lion and lioness have turned into a king and queen, the urge to individuate has reached the level of conscious realization, and can now be understood by the ego as being the real goal of life. Before the lions had transformed themselves into human beings, it was only the primitive women who sang, and they did so m a senti- mental manner; that is to say, the feelings of the dreamer remained on a primitive and sen- timental level. But in honor of the humanized lions, both the primitive and the civilized women chant a common hymn of praise. Their expression of their feelings in a united form shows that the inner split in the anima has now changed into inner harmony. Still another personification of the Self appears in a report of a woman's so-called "active imagination." (Active imagination is a certain way of meditating imaginatively, by Often the Self is representedasa helpful animal (asymbol ofthe psyche's instinctual basis).Top left, themagicfox ofGrimm's fairy tale "The Golden Bird." Center,the HindumonkeygodHanuman carrying thegods Siva and Parvati in his heart. Bottom, the heroicdog of filmsand television RinTin Tin. Stones are frequentimages ofthe Self (becausetheyarecomplete -- i.e., unchanging -- and lasting). Many peopletoday look forstones ofspecialbeauty -- perhapson beaches,top right.Some Hindus passfrom fatherto son stones (center) believed to have magical powers. "Precious" stones, likethe jewelsofQueen Elizabeth I (1558- 1 603) ,bottom, arean outward sign ofwealthand position. which one may deliberately enter into contact with the unconscious and make a conscious connection with psjxhic phenomena. Active imagination is among the most important of Jung's discoveries. While it is in a sense com- parable to Eastern forms of meditation, such as the technique of Zen Buddhism or of Tantric Yoga, or to Western techniques like those of the Jesuit Exercitia, it is fundamentally differ- ent in that the meditator remains completely devoid of any conscious goal or program. Thus the meditation becomes the solitary experiment of a free indi'vidual, which is the reverse of a guided attempt to master the unconscious. This, however, is not the place to enter into a de- tailed analysis of active imagination ; the reader wiU find one of Jung's descriptions of it in his paper on "The Transcendent Function.") In the woman's meditation the Self appeared as a deer, ^vhich said to the ego : "I am your child and your mother. They call me the 'con- necting animal' because I connect people, ani- mals, and even stones tsith one another if I enter them. I am your fate or the 'objective I.' When I appear, I redeem you from the meaningless hazards of life. The fire burning insideme bums in the whole of nature. If a man loses it, he becomes egocentric, lonely, disoriented, and weak." The Self is often symbolized as an animal, representing our instinctive nature and its con- nectedness wth one's surroundings. (That is why there are so many helpful animals in myths and fair)' tales.) This relation of the SeH to aU surrounding nature and even the cosmos probably comes from the fact that the "nuclear atom" of our psyche is someho^v \v'oven into the whole ^vorld, both outer and inner. AU the higher manifestations of life are somehow tuned to the surrounding space-time continuum. Animals, for example, have their o^\'n special foods, their particular home-buUding materials, and their definite territories, to aU of which their instinctive patterns are exactly tuned and adapted. Time rhythms also play their part: We have only to think of the fact that most grass-eating animals have their young at pre- cisely the time of year when the grass is richest and most abundant. With such considerations in mind, a \velI-kno\vn zoologist has said that the "inwardness" of each animal reaches far out into the world around it and "psychifies" time and space. In ^vays that are still completely beyond our comprehension, our unconscious is similarly attuned to our surroundings -- to our group, to society in general, and, beyond these, to the space-time continuum and the whole of nature. Thus the Great Man of the Naskapi Indians does not merely reveal inner truths; he also gives hints about where and when to hunt. And so from dreams the Naskapi hunter evolves the words and melodies of the magical songs with which he attracts the animals. But this specific help from the unconscious is not given to primitive man alone. Jung dis- covered that dreams can also give civilized man the guidance he needs in finding his way through the problems of both his inner and his outer life. Indeed, many of our dreams are con- cerned with details of our outer life and our surroundings. Such things as the tree in front of the window, one's bicycle or car, or a stone picked up during a walk may be raised to the level of symbolism through our dream life and become meaningful. If we pay attention to our dreams, instead of living in a cold, impersonal world of meaningless chance, \vc may begin to emerge into a ^vorld of our o^s'n, full of impor- tant and secretly ordered events. Our dreams, however, are not as a rule primarily concerned tvith our adaptation to outer life. In our civilized world, most dreams have to do with the development (by the ego) of the "right" inner attitude toward the Self, for this relationship is far more disturbed in us bymodem ways of thinking and behaving than is the case with primitive people. They gen- erally live directly from the inner center, but we, with our uprooted consciousness, are so entangled with external, completely foreign matters that it is very difficult for the messages of the Self to get through to us. Our conscious mind continually creates the illusion of a clearly shaped, "real" outer world that blocks off many other perceptions. Yet through our unconscious nature we are inexplicably connected to our psychic and physical environment. I have already mentioned the fact that the Self is symbolized with special frequency in the The "eternal" qualityofstonescan beseen in pebbles ormountains ; Left, rocks beneath Mt. Williamson, California.Thusstone hasalways been used formemorials -- likethe heads offour U.S. presidents (above) carved in the cliffface of Mt. Rushmore, North Dakota. Stoneswerealso often used to mark places ofworship -- aswasthe sacred stone in theTemple ofJerusalem (farright) . Itwasthe centerof the city;and (asthe medieval map, right,shows) the citywasseenas the centeroftheworld. form of a stone, precious or otherwise. We saw an example of this in the stone that was being polished by the she-bear and the lions. In many dreams the nuclear center, the Self, also appears as a crystal. The mathematically precise arrangement of a ciy'stal evokes in us the intui- tive feeling that even in so-called "dead" mat- ter, there is a spiritual ordering principle at tvork. Thus the crystal often symbolically stands for the union of extreme opposites -- of matter and spirit. Perhaps crj'stals and stones are especially apt symbols of the Self because of the "just-so-ness" of their nature. Many people caimot refrain from picking up stones of a slightly unusual color or shape and keeping them, rvithout know- ing why they do this. It is as if the stones held a living mystery that fascinates them. Men have collected stones since the beginning of time and have apparently assumed that certain ones were the containers of the life-force ^vith all its mys- tery. The ancient Germans, for instance, be- lieved that the spirits of the dead continued to live in their tombstones. The custom of placing stones on graves may spring partly from the symbolic idea that something eternal of the dead person remains, which can be most fittingly represented by a stone. For ^viule the human being is as different as possible from a stone, yet man's innermost center is in a strange and special way akin to it (perhaps because the stone symbolizes mere existence at the farthest remove from the emotions, feelings, fantasies, and discursive thinking of ego-consciousness). In this sense the stone symbolizes what is perhaps the simplest and deepest experience -- the experi- ence of something eternal that man can have in those moments when he feels immortal and xmalterable. The urge thatwe find in practically all civili- zations to erect stone monuments to famous men or on the site of important events probably also stems from this symbolic meaning of the stone. The stone that Jacob placed on the spot where he had his famous dream, or certain stones left by simple people on the tombs of local saints or heroes, show the original nature of the human urge to express an otherwise inex- pressible experience by the stone-symbol. It is no \vonder that many religious cults use a stone to signify God or to mark a place of ^vorship. The holiest sanctuary of the Islamic world is the Ka'aba, the black stone in Mecca to which all pious Moslems hope to make their pilgrimage. According to Christian ecclesiastical sym- bolism, Christ is "the stone that the builders rejected," which became "the head of the cor- ner" (Luke XX: 17). Alternatively he is called "the spiritual rock from which the water of life springs" (1 Cor. X : 4). Medieval alchemists, who searched for the secret of matter in a pre- scientific way, hoping to find God in it, or at least the working of divine activity, believed that this secret was embodied in their famous "philosophers' stone." But some of the alche- mists dimly perceived that their much-sought- after stone was a symbol of something that can be found only within the pysche of man. An old Arabian alchemist, Morienus, said : "This thing [the philosophers' stone] is extracted from you : you are its mineral, and one can find it in you; or, to put it more clearly, they [the alchemists] take it from you. If you recognize this, the love and approbation of the stone will grow within you. Know that this is true with- out doubt." The alchemical stone (the lapis) symbolizes something that can never be lost or dissolved, something eternal that some alchemists com- pared to the mystical experience of God within one's own soul. It usually takes prolonged suffering to bum away all the superfluous psychic elenients concealing the stone. But some profound inner experience of the Self does occur to most people at least once in a lifetime. From the psychological standpoint, a genuinely reli- gious attitude consists of an effort to discover this unique experience, and gradually to keep in tune with it (it is relevant that a stone is itself something permanent), so that the Self be- comes an inner partner toward whom one's attention is continually turned. The fact that this highest and most frequent symbol of the Self is an object of inorganic mat- ter points to yet another field of inquiry and speculation : that is, the stiU unknown relation- ship between what we call the unconscious psyche and what we call "matter" -- a mystery with which psychosomatic medicine endeavors to grapple. In studying this still undefined and Left, the BlackStone of Mecca, blessed byMahomet (in anArabic manuscript illustration) to integrate it intothe Islamic reiigion. It is carriedbyfourtribal chieftains (atthefourcorners of a carpet) into the Ka'aba, the holysanctuary towhichthousands ofMoslemsmake anannual pilgrimage (below left). Right,anothersymbolicstone : the Stone ofScone (orStone of Destiny) onwhich Scottish kings wereformerlycrowned. Itwastaken to England'sWestminsterAbbey in the 13th century, but it never lost itsimportance forScotland.On Christmas Day, 1950, a group of Scottish Nationalistsstolethe StonefromtheAbbeyandtook it backto Scotland. (Itwas returned totheAbbey in April 1951.) Right, a touristkissesthefamous "BlarneyStone" of Irish legend. It issupposed toconferthe giftof eloquenceonthosewho kiss it. unexplained connection (it may prove to be that "ps)'che" and "matter" are actually the same phenomenon, one observed from "within" and the other from 'hvithout"), Dr. Jung put for- ^vard a ne\v concept that he called synchroni- city. This term means a "meaningful coinci- dence" of outer and iimer events that are not themselves causally connected. The emphasis lies on the w'ord "meaningful." If an aircraft crashes before my eyes as I am blowingmy nose, this is a coincidence of events that has no meaning. It is simply a chance occurrence of a kind that happens all the time. But if I bought a blue frock and, by mistake, the shop dehvered a black one on the day one of my near relatives died, this would be a meaningful coinddence. The t\s-o events are not causally related, but they are connected by the symbolic meaning that our sodety gives to the color black. Wherever Dr. Jung obser\'ed such meaningful coincidences in an individual's life, it seemed (as the indiddual's dreams revealed) that there w'as an archetype activated in the unconscious of the individual concerned. To illustrate this by my example of the black frock : In such a case the person \vho receives the black frock might also have had a dream on the theme of death. It seems as if the tmderl^mg archetype is mani- festing itself simultaneously in inner and exter- nal events. The common denominator is a symbolically expressed message -- ^in tlus case a mesage about death. As soon as w'e notice that certain types of event "like" to duster together at certain times, we begin to understand the attitude of the Chinese, whose theories of medicine, philosophy, and even building are based on a "sdence" of meaningful coincidences. The dassical Chinese texts did not ask what causes what, but rather what "likes" to occur with w'hat. One can see A painting bythemodem artist Hans Haffenrichterresemblesthe pattern of a crystal -- like ordinary stone, asymbol ofwholeness. much the same underlying theme in astrology, and in the tvay various dvilizations have de- pended on consulting orades and paying atten- tion to omens. AH of these are attempts to provide an explanation of coinddence that is different from one that depends on straightfor- w'ard cause and effect. In creating the concept of synchronidty. Dr. Jimg sketched a way in \s'hich %s'e might pene- trate deeper into the inter-rdation of psyche and matter. And it is precisely toward such a relation that the symbol of the stone seems to point. But this is still a completdy open and insufficiently explored matter, \vith which future generations of psychologists and physi- cists must deal. It may seem thatmy discussion of synchroni- city' has led me a^yay frommy main theme, but I feel it is necessary to make at least a brief introductory reference to it because it is a Jungian hypothesis that seems to be pregnant with future possibilities of investigation and application. Synchronistic events, moreover, almost invariably accompany the crucial phases of the process of indidduation. But too often they pass unnoticed, because the indiddual has not learned to watch for such comcidences and to make them meaningful in relation to the symbolism of his dreams. 2II The relation to the Self Nowadays more and more people, especially those who live in large cities, suffer from a ter- rible emptiness and boredom, as if they are waiting for something that never arrives. Movies and television, spectator sports and political excitements may divert them for a while, but again and again, exhausted and disenchanted, they have to return to the wasteland of their own lives. The only adventure that is still .worthwhile for modem man lies in the inner realm of the unconscious psyche. With this idea vaguely in mind, many now turn to Yoga and other Eastern practices. But these offer no genuine new adventure, for in them one only takes over what is already known to the Hindus or the Chinese without directly meeting one's own inner life center. While it is true that Eastern methods serve to concentrate the mind and direct it inward (and that this procedure is in a sense similar to the introversion of an analy- tical treatment), there is a very important differ- ence. Jung evolved a way of getting to one's inner center and making contact with the living mystery of the unconscious, alone and unaided. That is utterly different from following a well- worn path. Trying to give the living reality of the Self a constant amount of daily attention is like trying to live simultaneously on two levels or in two different worlds. One gives one's mind, as before, to outer duties, but at the same time one remains alert for hints and signs, both in dreams and in external events, that the Self uses to symbolize its intentions -- the direction in which the life-stream is moving. Old Chinese texts that are concerned with this kind of experience often use the simile of the cat watching the mousehole. One text says that one should allow no other thoughts to in- trude, but one's attention should not be too sharp -- nor should it be too dull. There is exactly the right level of perception. "If the training is undergone in this manner ... it will be effective as time goes on, and when the cause comes to fruition, like a ripe melon that auto- matically falls, anything it may happen to touch or make contact with will suddenly cause the individual's supreme awakening. This is the moment when the practitioner will be like one who drinks water and alone knows whether it is cold or warm. He becomes free of all doubts about himself and experiences a great happiness similar to that one feels in meeting one's own father at the crossroads." Thus, in the midst of ordinary outer life, one is suddenly caught up in an exciting inner adventure; and because it is unique for each individual, it cannot be copied or stolen. There are two main reasons why man loses contact with the regulating center of his soul. One of them is that some single instinctive drive or emotional image can carry him into a one- sidedness that makes him lose his balance. This also happens to animals; for example, a sexu- ally excited stag ^vill completely forget himger and securit)'. This one-sidedness and consequent loss of balance aremuch dreaded by primitives, who caU it "loss of soul." Another threat to the inner balance comes from excessive daydream- ing, ^s'hich in a secretway usually circles around particular complexes. In fact, daydreams arise just because they cormect a man ivith his com- plexes ; at the same time they threaten the con- centration and continuit)- of his consciousness. The second obstacle is exactly the opposite, and is due to an over-consolidation of ego- consciousness. Although a disciplined conscious- ness is necessary for the performance of civilized acti\'ities (we know what happens if a railway signalman lapses into daydreaming), it has the serious disadvantage that it is apt to block the reception of impulses and messages coming from the center. This is why so many dreams of chilized people are concerned rrith restoring this receptirity by attempting to correct the attitude of consciousness to\v'ard the uncon- scious center or Self. Among the mj-thological representations of the Self one finds much emphasis on the four comers of the world, and in many pictures the Great Man is represented in the center of a circle dirided into four. Jung used the Hindu word mandala (magic circle) to designate a structure of this order, which is a symbolic re- presentation of the "nuclear atom" of the human ps^'che -- ^whose essence we do not know. In this connection it is interesting that a Nas- kapi hunter pictorially represented his Great Man not as a human being but as a mandala. Whereas the Naskapi experience the inner center directly and naively, wthout the help of religious rites or doctrines, other communities use the mandala motif in order to restore a lost inner balance. For instance, theNavaho Indians try, by means of mandala-structured sand paintings, to bring a sick person back into har- mony \rith himself and wth the cosmos -- and thereby to restore his health. In Eastern ci\'ilizations similar pictures are used to consolidate the irmer being, or to enable one to plunge into deep meditation. The con- templation of a mandala is meant to bring an inner peace, a feeling that life has again foimd its meaning and order. The mandala also con- \t\s this feeling when it appears spontaneously in the dreams ofmodemmen ^\•ho are not influ- enced by any religious tradition of this sort and know nothing about it. Perhaps the positive effect is even greater in such cases because knowledge and tradition sometimes blur or even block the spontaneous experience. An example of a spontaneously produced mandala occurs in the folIo\\'ing dream of a 62- The feelingsofboredomandapathy fromwhich citydwellerstodayoften suffer isonlytemporarilyoffset bysuch artificial excitementsas adventurefilms (farleft) andtime- killing "amusements" (left).Jung stressed thatthe onlyrealadventure remaining foreach individual isthe exploration ofhisown unconscious. Theultimategoal ofsuch asearch istheforming of aharmoniousand balanced relationshipwiththe Self. The circularmandalaimagesthis perfectbalance -- embodied inthe structureofthemodem cathedral (right) ofthecityofBrasilia. Top, a Navaho makes asand painting (a mandaia) in a heaiing rituai;the patient sits inthe painting.Above, a pian ofthe painting ; itmustbe circled bya patient before entering. Left, a winterlandscape bythe German artist Kaspar Friedrich. Landscape paintings usuallyexpress indefinable"moods" -- asdo symboliclandscapes in dreams. year-old woman. It emerged as a prelude to a new phase of life in which she became very creative : I see a landscape in a dim light. In the back- ground I see the rising and then evenly continu- ing crest of a hill. Along the line where it rises moves a quadrangular disk that shines like gold. In the foreground I see dark plowed earth that is beginning to sprout. Now I suddenly perceive a round table with a grey stone slab as its top, and at the same moment the quadrangular disk sud- denly stands upon the table. It has left the hill, but how and why it has changed its place I do not know. Landscapes in dreams (as well as in art) fre- quently symbolize an inexpressible mood. In this dream, the dim hght of the landscape indi- cates that the clarity of daytime consciousness is dimmed. "Inner nature" may now begin to reveal itself in its own light, so we are told that the quadrangular disk becomes visible on the horizon. Hitherto the symbol of the Self, the disk, had been largely an intuitive idea on the dreamer's mental horizon, butnow in the dream it shifts its position and becomes the center of the landscape of her soul. A seed, sown long ago, begins to sprout : for a long time previ- ously the dreamer had paid careful attention to her dreams, and notv this tvork bears fruit. (One is reminded of the relation bettveen the symbol of the Great Man and plant life, which I mentioned before.) Now the golden disk sud- denlymoves to the "right" side -- the sidewhere things become conscious. Among other things "right" often means, psychologically, the side of consciousness, of adaptation, ofbeing "right," while "left" signifies the sphere of unadapted, unconscious reactions or sometimes even of something "sinister." Then, finally, the golden disk stops its movement and comes to rest on -- significantly -- a round stone table. It has found a permanent base. As Aniela Jaffe observes later in this book, roundness (the mandala motif) generally sym- bolizes a natural wholeness, whereas a quad- rangular formation represents the realization of this in consciousness. In the dream the square disk and the round table meet, and thus a con- scious realization of the center is at hand. The round table, incidentally, is a well-known sym- bol of wholeness and plays a role in mythology -- ^for instance. King Arthur's round table, which itself is an image derived from the table of the Last Supper. In fact, whenever a human being gehuinely turns to the inner world and tries to know him- self -- not by ruminating about his subjective thoughts and feelings, but by following the ex- pressions of his own objecdve nature such as dreams and genuine fantasies -- then sooner or later the Self emerges. The ego will then find an inner power that'contains all the possibilities of renewal. In the paintings, left, ofthedream quotedon thispage (painted bythe dreamer),themandala motifappears asa quadrangle ratherthana circle. Usuallyquadrangularformssymbolize conscious realization ofinner wholeness ;thewholeness itself is mostoften represented in circular forms,such astheround table that also appears in thedream. Right, the legendary RoundTable ofKing Arthur (from a 1 5th-century manuscript), atwhichthe Holy Grail appeared in avisionand startedtheknightsonthefamous quest.The Grail itselfsymbolizes the innerwholenessforwhichmen have alwaysbeen searching. But there is a great difficulty that I have mentioned only indirectly up till now. This is that every personification of the unconscious -- the shadow, the anima, the animus, and the Self -- has both a light and a dark aspect. We saw before that the shadow may be base or evil, an instinctive drive that one ought to overcome. It may, however, be an impulse toward growth that one should cultivate and follow. In the same way the anima and animus have dual aspects : They can bring life-giving development and creativencss to the personality, or they can cause petrification and physical death. And even the Self, the all-embracing symbol of the un- conscious, has an ambivalent effect, as for in- stance in the Eskimo tale (page 196), when the "little woman" offered to save the heroine from the Moon Spirit but actually turned her into a spider. The dark side of the Self is the most dan- gerous thing of all, precisely because the Self is the greatest power in the psyche. It can cause people to "spin" mcgalomanic or other delusory fantasies that catch them up and "possess" them. A person in this state thinks with mounting excitement that he has grasped and solved the great cosmic riddles; he there- fore loses all touch tvith human reality. A re- liable symptom of this condition is the loss of one's sense of humor and of human contacts. Thus the emerging of the Self may bring great danger to a man's conscious ego. The double aspect of the Self is beautifully illustrated by this old Iranian fairy tale, called "The Secret of the Bath Badgerd" : The great and noble Prince Hatim Tai receives orders from his king to investigate the mysterious Bath Badgerd [castle of nonexistence]. When he approaches it, having gone through many dan- gerous adventures, he hears that nobody ever re- turned from it, but he insists on going on. He is received at a round building by a barber with a mirror who leads him into the bath, but as soon as the prince enters the water, a thunderous noise breaks out, it gets completely dark, the barber disappears, and slowly the water begins to rise. Hatim swims desperately round until the water finally reaches the top of the round cupola, which forms the roof of the bath. Now he fears he is lost, but he says a prayer and grabs the center- stone of the cupola. Again a thunderous noise, everything changes, and Hatim stands alone in a desert. After long and painful wandering, he comes to a beautiful garden in the middle of which is a circle of stone statues. In the centre of the statues, he secs a parrot in its cage, and a voice from above says to him : "Oh, hero, you probably will not escape alive from this bath. Once Gayomart (the First Man) found an enormous diamond that shone more brightly than sun and moon. He de- cided to hide it where no one can find it, and tlierefore he built this magical bath in order to protect it. The parrot that you see here forms part of the magic. At its feet lie a golden bow and arrow on a golden chain, and with them you may try three times to shoot the parrot. If you hit him the curse will be lifted, if not, you will be petrified, as were all these other people." Hatim tries once, and fails. His legs turn to stone. He fails once more and is petrified up to his chest. The third time he just shuts his eyes, exclaiming "God is great," shoots blindly, and this time hits the parrot. An outbreak of thun- der, clouds of dust. When all this has subsided, in place of the parrot is an enormous, beautiful dia- mond, and all the statues have come to life again. The people thank him for their redemption. The reader tvill recognize the symbols of the Self in this story -- the First Man Gayomart, the round mandala-shaped building, the center- stone, and the diamond. But this diamond is surrounded by danger. The demonic parrot signifies the evil spirit of imitation that makes one miss the target and petrify psychologically. As I pointed out earlier, the process of indivi- duation excludes any parrot-like imitation of others. Time and again in all countries people have tried to copy in "outer" or ritualistic be- havior the original religious experience of their great religious teachers -- Christ or Buddha or some other master -- and have therefore become "petrified." To follow in the steps of a great spiritual leader does not mean that one should copy and act out the pattern of the individua- tion process made by his life. It means that we should try with a sincerity and devotion equal to his to live our own lives. The barber with the mirror, who vanishes, symbolizes the gift of reflection that Hatim loses when he wants it most; the rising waters represent the risk that one may drown in the unconscious and get lost in one's own emotions. In order to understand the symbolic indications of the unconscious, one must be careful not to get outside oneself or "beside oneself," but to stay emotionally within oneself. Indeed, it is vitally important that the ego should continue to function in normal ^vays. Only if I remain an ordinary human being, conscious of my in- completeness, can I become receptive to the significant contents and processes of the uncon- scious. But how can a human being stand the tension of feeling himself at one with the whole universe, while at the same time he is only a miserable earthly human creature? If, on the one hand, I despise myself as merely a statistical cipher, my life has no meaning and is not worth living. But if, on the other hand, I feel myself to be part of something much greater, how am I to keep my feet on the ground? It is very difficult indeed to keep these inner opposites united within oneself without toppling over into one or the other extreme. Far left, the torrential waters ofthe river Heraclitosoverwhelm a Greektemple, in a painting by the modern French artistAndrS Masson.The painting can be seen asan allegory ofthe resultsof imbalance : Greekoveremphasison logicand reason (thetemple) leading to a destructive eruption of instinctual forces. Left, a more direct allegory,from a 1 5th-century illustrationtothe French allegorical poemRoman de laRose : the figureof Logic (on the right) isthrown intoconfusion when confronted by Nature. Right,the repentant St. Mary Magdalen gazes into a mirror (in a painting bythe 17th-century French artistGeorgesde laTour) . Here, as inthetale ofthe Bath BSdgerd,the mirrorsymbolizesthe much-needed facultyoftrue, inward-looking "reflection." The social aspect of the Self Today the enormous growth of population, especially obvious in large cities, inevitably has a depressing effect on us. We think, "Oh, well, I am only so-and-so living at such-and-such an address, like thousands of other people. If a few of them get killed, what difference can it make? There are far too many people in any case."And whenwe read in the paper about the deaths of innumerable unknown people who personally mean nothing to us, the feeling that our lives count for nothing is further increased. This is the moment when attention to the un- conscious brings the greatest help, for dreams show the dreamer how each detail of his life is interwoven with the most significant realities. What we all know theoretically -- that every thing depends on the individual -- becomes through dreams a palpable fact that everyone can experience for himself. Sometimes we have a strong feeling that the Great Man wants something from us and has set us very special tasks. Our response to this experience can help us to acquire the strength to swim against the stream of collective prejudice by taking our own soul seriously into account. Naturally this is not always an agreeable task. For instance, you want to make a trip with friends next Sunday; then a dream forbids it and demands that you do some creative work instead. If you listen to your unconscious and obey it, you must expect constant interference with your conscious plans. Your will is crossed by other intentions -- intentions that you must submit to, or at any rate must seriously con- sider. This is partly why the obligation attached to the process of individuation is often felt to be a burden rather than an immediate blessing. St. Christopher, the patron of all travelers, is a fitting symbol for this experience. According to the legend, he felt an arrogant pride in his tremendous physical strength, and was willing to serve only the strongest. First he served a king; but when he saw that the king feared the devil, he left him and became the devil's servant. Then one day he discovered that the devil feared the Crucifix, and so he decided to serve Christ if he could find him. He followed the advice of a priest who told him to wait for Christ at a ford. In the years that passed he carried many people across the river. But once, on a dark, stormy night, a small child called out that he wanted to be carried over the riyer. With the greatest ease, St. Christopher lifted the child on to his shoulders, but he walked Theachievementof psychological maturity isan individualtask -- andso is increasingly difficult todaywhen man's individuality is threatened bywidespread conformity. Far left,a modern British housing developmentwith itsstereotyped dwellings ; left, aSwiss athletics displayprovidesanimage of massregimentation. more slowly tvith every step, for his burden be- came heavier and heavier. When he arrived in midstream, he felt "as if he carried the tvhole universe." He realized then that he had taken Christ upon his shoulders -- and Christ gavehim remission of his sins and eternal life. This miraculous child is a symbol of the Self that literally "depresses" the ordinary human being, even though it is the only thing that can redeem him. In many works of art the Christ child is depicted as, or wfh, the sphere of the world, a motif that clearly denotes the Self, for a child and a sphere are both universal symbols of totality. When a person tries to obey the imconscious, he will often, as we have seen, be unable to do just as he pleases. But equally he will often be unable to do ^vhat other people want him to do. It often happens, for instance, that he must separate from his group -- from his family, his partner, or other personal connections -- ^in order to find himself. That is tvhy it is sometimes said that attending to the unconscious makes people antisocial and egocentric. As a rule this is not true, for there is a little-knowm factor that enters into this attitude: the collective (or, we could even say, social) aspect of the Self. Above, a pagefromWilliam Blake's Songs ofInnocenceandExperience, inwhichthepoems reveal Blake's concept ofthe"divine child" -- a well-knownsymbolofthe Self. Right a 1 6th-centurypainting of St Christopher carrying Christ as a divine child (who isencircled by aworld sphere -- amandalaand a symbol ofthe Self).Thisburden symbolizesthe"weight" ofthe taskofindividuation -- justasSt Christopher's role asthe patron of travelers (far right a St Christophermedallionon a car's ignition key) reflects his link with man'sneedto travelthe path to psychologicalwholeness. From a practical angle this factor reveals itself in that an individual who follows his dreams for a considerable time will find that they are often concerned with his relationships with other people. His dreams may warn him against trusting a certain person too much, or he may dream about a favorable and agreeable meeting with someonewhom he may previously have never consciously noticed. If a dream does pick up the image of another person for us in some such fashion, there are two possible inter- pretations. First, the figure may be a projection, which means that the dream-image of this per- son is a symbol for an inner aspect of the dreamer himself. One dreams, for instance, of a dishonest neighbor, but the neighbor is used by the dream as a picture of one's own dis- honesty. It is the task of dream interpretation . to find out in which special areas one's own dishonesty comes into play. (This is called dream interpretation on the subjective level.) But it also happens at times that dreams genuinely tell us something about other people. In this way, the unconscious plays a role that is far from being fully understood. Like all the higher forms of life, man is in tune with the living beings around him to a remarkable de- gree. He perceives their sufferings and prob- lems, their positive and negative attributes and values, instinctively -- quite independently of his conscious thoughts about other people. Our dream life allows us to have a look at these subliminal perceptions and shows us that they have an effect upon us. After having an agreeable dream about somebody, even with- out interpreting the dream, I shall involuntarily look at that person with more interest. The dream image may have deluded me, because of my projections; or it may have given me i objective information. To find out which is the I Theconscious realization ofthe Selfcan create a bondamong people that ignoresmore obvious, natural groups like thefamily (above left). A mental kinshipon a conscious level can often bethe nucleus of cultural development ; above, the 18th-century French encyclopedists (Including Voltaire, with raised hand) ; below, a painting by Max Ernst ofthe early20th-century"Dadaist" artists ;and research physicists at Britain'sWills Laboratory. The psychological balanceand unity thatman needstodayhavebeen symbolized inmanymoderndreams bytheunion ofthe French girl andtheJapaneseman in thewidely popular French film Hiroshimamon Amour (1959), above.And inthe same dreams,the opposite extreme fromwholeness (i.e.,complete psychological dissociation,or madness) hasbeen symbolized by a related 20th-centutyimage -- anatomic explosion (right). correct interpretation requires an honest, atten- tive attitude and careful thought. But, as is the case tsdth aU inner processes, it is ultimately the Self that orders and regulates one'shuman rela- tionships, so long as the conscious ego takes the trouble to detect the delusive projections and deals ^nth these inside himself instead of outside. It is in this way that spiritually attuned and similarly oriented people find their tvay to one another, to create a group that cuts across all the usual social and organizational affilia- tions of people. Such a group is not in conflict with others; it is merely different and inde- pendent. The consciously realized process of indi\'iduation thus changes a person's relation- ships. The familiar bonds such as kinship or common interests are replaced by a different t^qae of unity -- a bond through the Self. All acti\'ities and obligations that belong ex- clusively to the outer -^vorld do definite harm to the secret acti\ities of the unconscious. Through these unconscious ties those ^vho belong to- gether come together. That is one reason why attempts to influence people by advertisements and political propaganda are destructive, even when inspiredJay idealistic motives. Tliis raises the important question of whether the unconscious part of the human psyche can be influenced at all. Practical e.\perience and accurate observation show that one caimot in- fluence one's o\m dreams. There are people, it is true, ts-ho assert that they can influence them. But if you look into their dream material, you find that they do only what I do with my diso- bedient dog ; I order him to do those things I notice he wants to do anyhow, so that I can preserve my illusion of authority. Only a long process of interpreting one's dreams and con- fronting oneself %vith -what they have to say can gradually transform the unconscious. And con- scious attitudes also must change in this process. If a man who wants to influence public opinion misuses symbols for this purpose, they Avill naturally impress the masses in so far as they are true symbols, but whether or not the mass unconscious \vill be emotionally gripped by them is something that cannot be calculated in advance, something that remains completely irrational. No music publisher, for instance, can tell in advance whether a song ^viU become a hit or not, even though it may dratv on popular images and melodies. No deliberate attempts to influence the unconscious have yet produced any significant results, and it seems that the mass unconscious preser^'es its autonomy just as much as the indiwdual unconscious. At times, in order to express its purpose, the unconscious may use a motif from our external world and thus may seem to have been influ- enced by it. For instance, I have come across many dreams of modem people that have to do with Berlin. In these dreams Berlin stands as a symbol of the psychic weak spot -- the place of danger -- and for this reason is the place where the Self is apt to appear. It is the point where the dreamer is tom by conflict and wher^ he might, therefore, be able to unite the inner opposites. I have also encountered an extraordinary number of dream reactions to the film Hiroshima Mon Amour. In most of these dreams the idea was expressed that either the two lovers in the film must unite (which sym- bolizes the union of inner opposites) or there would be an atomic explosion (a symbol of com- plete dissociation, equivalent to madness). Only when the manipulators of public opinion add commercial pressure or acts of violence to their activities do they seem to achieve a temporary success. But in fact this merely causes a repression of the genuine un- conscious reactions. And mass repression leads to the same result as individual repression ; that is, to neurotic dissociation and psychological illness. All such attempts to repress the reactions of the unconscious must fail in the long mn, for they are basically opposed to our instincts. We know from studying the social behavior of the higher animals that small groups (from approximately 10 to 50 individuals) create the As in thedream quoted on p. 223, positiveanima figures often assist andguide men.Top ofpage,from a 10th-century psalter, David inspired bythe muse Melodia.Above, a goddesssaves ashipwrecked sailor (in a 1 6th-century painting). Right, onan early20th-centurypostcard from Monte Carlo,gamblers'"Lady Luck" -- also a helpful anima. Right, Liberty leading the French revolutionaries (in a painting by Delacroix) imagestheanima's function ofassisting individuation by liberating unconscious contents. Farright, in ascenefrom the 1925 fantasyfilm Metropo//s, awoman urgesrobot-likeworkerstofind spiritual "liberation." best possible living conditions for the single animal as well as for the group, and man seems to be no exception in this respect. His physical ^vell-being, his spiritual psychic health, and, beyond the animal realm, his cultural efficiency seem to flourish best in such a social formation. As far as we at present understand the process of individuation, the Self apparently tends to produce such small groups by creating at the same time sharply defined ties of feeling be- tween certain individuals and feelings of re- latedness to aU people. Only if these connections are created by the Self can one feel any assur- ance that envy, jealousy, fighting, and all man- ner of negative projections ^vill not break up the group. Thus an unconditional devotion to one's own process of individuation also brings about the best possible social adaptation. This does not mean, of course, that there will not be collisions of opinion and conflicting obligations, or disagreement about the "right" \vay, in the face of ^vhich one must constantly withdra^v and listen to one's iimer voice in order to find the individual standpoint that the Self intends one to have. Fanatical political activity (but not the per- formance of essential duties) seems somehow incompatible with individuation. A man who devoted himself entirely to freeing his country from foreign occupation had this dream : With some of my compatriots I go up a stair- way to the attic of a museum, where there is a hall painted black and looking like a cabin on a ship. A distinguished looking middle-aged lady opens the door; her name is X, daughter of X. [X was a famous national hero of the dreamer's country who attempted some centuries ago to free it. He might be compared to Joan of Arc or Wil- liam Tell. In reality X had no children.] In the hall we see the portraits of two aristocratic ladies dressed in flowery brocaded garments. While Miss X is explaining these pictures to us, they sud- denly come to life; first the eyes begin to live, and then the chest seems to breathe. People are sur- prised and go to a lecture room where Miss X will speak to them about the phenomenon. She says that through her intuition and feeling these portraits came alive; but some of the people are indignant and say that MissX is mad ; some even leave the lecture room. The important feature of this dream is that the anima figure. Miss X, is purely a creation of the dream. She has, however, the name of a famous national hero-liberator (as if she were, for instance, Wilhehnina Tell, the daughter of William TeU). By the implications contained in the name, the unconscious is pointing to the fact that today the dreamer should not try, as X did long ago, to free his country in an outer way. Now, the dream says, liberation is accom- plished by the anima (by the dreamer's soul), who accomplishes it by bringing the images of the unconscious to life. That the hall in the attic of the museum looks partly like a ship's cabin painted black is very meaningful. The black color hints at dark- ness, night, a turning inward, and if the hall is a cabin, then the museum is somehow also a ship. This suggests that when the mainland of collective consciousness becomes flooded by un- consciousness and barbarism, this museum-ship, filled with living images, may turn into a saving ark that will carry those who enter it to another spiritual shore. Portraits hanging in a museum arc usually the dead remains of the past, and often the images of the unconscious arc re- garded in the same way until we discover that they arc alive and meaningful. \Vhen the anima (who appears here in her rightful role of soul- guide) contemplates the images with intuition and feeling, they begin to live. The indignant people in the dream represent the side of the dreamer that is influenced by collective opinion -- something in him that dis- trusts and rejects the bringing to life of psycluc images. They personify a resistance to the un- conscious that might express itself something like this ; "But what if they begin dropping atom bombs on us? Psychological insight won't be much help then!" This resistant side is unable to free itself from statistical thinking and from extraverted rational prejudices. The dream, however, points out tliat in our time genuine liberation can start only with a psychological transformation. To what end docs one liberate one's country if afterward there is no meaningful goal of life -- no goal for which it is worthwhile to be free? If man no longer finds any meaning in his life, it makes no difference whether he wastes away under a communist or a capitalist regime. Only if he can use his freedom to create something meaningful is it relevant that he should be free. That is why finding the inner meaning of life is more important to the individual than any- thing else, and why the process of individuation must be given priority. Attempts to influence public opinion by means of newspapers, radio, television, and advertising are based on two factors. On the one hand, they rely on sampling techniques that reveal the trend of "opinion" or "wants" -- that is, of collective attitudes. On the other, they express the prejudices, projections, and uncon- scious complc-xcs (mainly the power complex) of those who manipulate public opinion. But statistics do no justice to the individual. /Mthough the average size of stones in a hc.ap may be five centimeters, one will find vcr\- few stones of exactly this size in the heap. That the second factor cannot create anv- thing positive is clear from the start. But if a single individual devotes himself to individua- tion, he frequently has a positive contagious effect on the people around him. It is as if a spark leaps from one to another. And this \isu- ally occurs when one has no intention of influ- encing others and often when one uses no words. It is onto this inner path that Muss X tried to lead the dreamer. Nearly all religious systems on our planet contain images that symbolize the process of individuation, or at least some stages of it. In Christian countries the Self is projected, as I said before, onto the second Adam : Christ. In the East the relevant figures are those of Krishna and Buddha. For people wJio arc contained in a religion (that is, who still really believe in its content and teachings), the psychological regulation of their lives is effected by religious symbols, and even their dreams often revolve around them. When the late Pope Pius XII issued the decla- ration of the Assumption of Mary, a Catholic woman dreamed, for instance, that she ^\'as a Catholic priestess. Her unconscious seemed to extend the dogma in this way : "If Mar)' is now almost a goddess, she should have pricstcs.scs." Another Catholic woman, who had resistances to some of the minor and outer aspects of her creed, dreamed that the church of her home city had been pulled down and rebuilt, but that the tabernacle with the consecrated host and the statue of the Virgin Mary were to be trans- ferred from the old to the new church. The dream showed her that some of the man-made aspects of her religion needed renewal, but that its basic symbols -- God's having become Man, and the Great Mother, the Virgin Maiy' -- would sur\'ive the change. Such dreams demonstrate the living interest that the unconscious takes in the con-scious re- ligious representations of an individual. This 22.) raises the question whether it is possible to de- tect a general trend in all the religious dreams of contemporary people. In the manifestations of the imconscious foimd in our modem Chris- tian culture, whether Protestant or Catholic, Dr. Jimg often observed that there is an un- conscious tendency at \vork to round off our trinitarian formula of the Godhead with a fourth element, which tends to be feminine, dark, and even evil. Actually this fourth ele- ment has alrva)'s existed in the realm of our religious representations, but it was separated from the image of God and became his coun- terpart, in the form of matter itself (or the lord of matter -- ^i.e., the devil). Now the unconscious seems to rvant to reimite these extremes, the light ha\'ing become too bright and the dark- ness too somber. Naturally it is the central sym- bol of religion, the image of the Godhead, that is most exposed to unconscious tendencies to- ward transformation. A Tibetan abbot once told Dr. Jung that the most impressive mandalas in Tibet are built up by imagination, or directed fantasy, when the psychological balance of the group is disturbed or tvhen a particular thought cannot be rend- ered because it is not yet contained in the sac- red doctrine and must therefore be searched for. In these remarks, two equally important basic aspects of mandala symbolism emerge. The mandala serves a conservative purpose -- namely, to restore a previously existing order. But it also seiv'es the creative purpose of giving expression and form to something that does not yet exist, something ne^v and imique. The second aspect is perhaps even more important than the first, but does not contradict it. For, in most cases, ivhat restores the old order simul- taneously involves some element of ne^v crea- tion. In the ne\v order the older pattern returns on a higher level. The process is that of the ascending spiral, which grows up^vard while simultaneously returning again and again to the same point. A painting by a simple woman who was brought up in Protestant surroundings shows a mandala in the fonn of a spiral. In a dream this %voman received an order to paint the God- head. Later (also in a dream) she saw it in a book. Of God himself she saw only his \vafting cloak, the drapery' of which made a beautiful display' of hght and shadow. This contrasted impressively with the stability of the spiral in the deep blue sky. Fascinated by the cloak and the spiral, the dreamer did not look closely at the other figure on the rocks. When she awoke and thought about tvho these divine figures were, she suddenly realized that it was "God himself." This gave her a frightful shock, which she felt for a long time. Usually the Holy Ghost is represented iix Christian art by a fiery wheel or a dove, but here it has appeared as a spiral. This is a new thought, "not yet contained in the doctrine," This 1 5lh-centurystatue of Mary containswithin itimages of both Godand Christ -- a clearexpression ofthe fact thatthe Virgin Mary can be said tobe a representation ofthe"Great Mother" archetype. A miniaturefrom the 1 5th-century French Book ofHours,showing Mary with the HolyTrinity.The Catholic Church'sdogma oftheAssumption oftheVirgin -- inwhich Mary.as dominarerum. Queen of Nature,was declared to have entered heaven with souland body reunited -- can be said to havemade the Trinity fourfold,corresponding withthe basicarchetype ofcompleteness. which has spontaneously arisen from the un- conscious. That the Holy Ghost is the power that works for the further development of our religious understanding is not a new idea, of course, but its symbolic representation in the form of a spiral is new. The same woman then paihted a second picture, also inspired by a dream, showing the dreamer tvith her positive animus standmg above Jerusalem tvhen the wing of Satan de- scends to darken the city. The satanic wing strongly reminded her of the wafting cloak of God in the first painting, but in the former dream the spectator is high up, somewhere in heaven, and sees in front of her a terrific split between the rocks. The movement in the cloak of God is an attempt to reach Christ, the figure on the rigiit, but it does not quite succeed. In the second painting, the same thing is seen from below -- from a human angle. Looking at it from a higher angle, what is moving and spreading is a part of God ; above that rises the spiral as a symbol of possible further develop- ment. But seen from tlie basis of our human reality, this same thing in the air is the dark, uncanny tving of the devil. In the dreamer's life these two pictures be- came real in a way that does not concern us here, but it is obvious that they also contain a collective meaning that reaches beyond the per- sonal. They may prophesy the descent of a dmne darkness upon the Christian hemisphere, a darkness that points, however, toward the possibility of further evolution. Since the axis of the spiral does not move upward but into the background of the picture, the further evo- lution will lead neither to greater spiritual height nor down into the realm of matter, but to another dimension, probably into the back- ground of these divine figures. And that means into the unconscious. When religious symbols that are partly dif- ferent from those sve kno\v emerge from the unconscious of an individual, it is often feared that these will wrongfully alter or diminish the officially recognized religious symbok. This fear even causes many people to reject analytical psychology and the entire unconscious. If I look at such a resistance from a psy- chological point of view, I should have to com- ment that as far as religion is concerned, human beings can be divided into three types. First, there are those ^vho still genuinely believe their religious doctrines, whatever they may be. For these people, the symbols and doctrines "click" so satisfyingly ^vith what they feel deep inside themselves tliat serious doubts have no chance to sneak in. This happens ^vhen the views of consciousness and the unconscious background are in relative harmony. People of this sort can afford to look at new psycho- logical discoveries and facts without prejudice and need not fear that they may be caused to lose their faith. Even if their dreams should bring up some relatively unorthodox details, these can be integrated into their general view. The second type consists of those people who have completely lost their faith and have re- placed it wth purely conscious, rational opinions. For these people, depth psychology simply means an introduction into newly dis- covered areas of the psyche, and it should cause no trouble when they embark on the new ad- venture and investigate their dreams to test the truth of them. Then there is a third group of people who in one part of themselves (probably the head) no longer believe in their religious traditions. whereas in some other part they still do believe. The French philosopher Voltaire is an illustra- tion of this. He violently attacked the Catholic Church with rational argument {ecrasez I'in- fame), but on his deathbed, according to some reports, he begged for extreme unction. Whether this is true or not, his head was cer- tainly unreligious, whereas his feelings and emotions seem still to have been orthodox. Such people remind one of a person getting stuck in the automatic doom of a bus ; he can neither get out into free space nor re-enter the bus. Of course the dreams of such persons could prob- ably help them out of their dilemma, but such people frequently have trouble turning to^vard the unconscious because they themselves do not know ^vhat they think and want. To take the unconscious seriously is ultimately a matter of personal courage and integrity. The complicated situation of those who are caught in a no man's land between the t^vo states of mind is partly created by the fact that all official religious doctrines actually belong to the collective consciousness (what Freud called the super-ego) ; but once, long ago, they sprang from the unconscious. This is a point that many historians of religion and theologians challenge. They choose to assume that there \\'as once some sort of "revelation." I have searched for many years for concrete evidence for the Jun- Paintings ofthedreamsdiscussed on pp. 225-6 : Left,the spiral (a form ofmandala) represents the HoiyGhost ; right,thedarkwing ofSatan,fromthesecond dream. Neither motifwould bea familiar religioussymbol tomost people (norweretheytothe dreamer) : Each emergedspontaneously fromthe unconscious. gian hj'pothesis about this problem; but it has been difficult to find because most rituals are so old that one cannot trace their origin. The follov.'ing example, however, seems to me to offer a most important clue : Black Elk, a medicine man of the Ogalala SioiLX, who died not long ago, tells us in his autobiography Black Elk Speaks that, when he was nine years old, he became seriously ill and during a sort of coma had a tremendous \-ision. He saw four groups of beautiful horses coming from the four corners of the world, and then, seated tM'thin a cloud, he sa^v the Six Grand- fathers, the ancestral spirits of his tribe, "the grandfathers of the ^vhole world." They gave him six healing symbols for his people and sho\ved him new \va\-s of life. But when he was 16 years old, he suddenly developed a terrible phobia •ivhenever a thunder storm rvas ap- proaching, because he heard "thimder beings" calling to him "to make haste." It reminded him of the thundering noise made by the ap- proaching horses in his %Tsion. An old medicine man ex-plained to him that his fear came from the fact that he wzs keeping his \'ision to him- self, and said that he must tell it to his tribe. He did so, and later he and his people acted out the \-ision in a ritual, using real horses. Not merely Black Elk himself, but many other members of his tribe felt infinitely better after this play. Some ^\ere even cured of their dis- eases. Black Elk said : "Even the horses seemed to be healthier and happier after the dance." The ritual was not repeated because the tribe was destroyed soon aftenvard. But here is a different case in which a ritual still sur\ives. Several Eskimo tribes liHng near the Colville River in Alaska explain the origin of their eagle festival in the follo^ving way: .A. young hunter shot dead a very unusual eagle and was so impressed by the beaut)- of the dead bird that he stuffed and made a fetish of him, honoring him by sacrifices. One day, when the hunter had traveled far inland during his hunt- ing, two animal-men suddenly appeared in die role of messengers and led him to the land of the eagles. There he heard a dark drumming noise. and the messengers explained that this \%-as tl.t heanbeat of the dead eagle's mother. Then the eagle spirit appeared to the hunter as a woman clodied in black. She asked him to initiate an eagle festival among his people to honor her dead son. -After the eagle people had shou-n him h.ow to do this, he suddenly found himself, c.xhaustcd, back in the place where he had met the messen- gers. Returning home, he taught his people ho\v to perform the great eagle festival -- ^as th.ev have done faithfully ever since. From such examples we see how a ritual or religious custom can spring directly from an unconscious revelation experienced by a single individual. Out of such beginnings, people liv- ing in cultural groups develop their various re- ligious activities with their enormous influence on the entire life of the societ)-. During a long process of evolution the original material is shaped and reshaped by words and actions, is beautified, and acquires increasingly definite forms. This crystallizing process, however, has a great disadvantage. More and more people have no personal knotvledgc of the original ex- perience and can only believe what their ciders and teachers tell them about it. They no longer know that such happenings arc real, and they are of course ignorant about how one feels dur- ing the experience. In their present forms, xvorked over and e.x- ceedingly aged, such religious traditions often resist further creative alterations by the uncon- scious. Theologians sometimes even defend these "true" religious symbols and sy-mbolic doctrines against the discovery of a religious function in the unconscious psyche, forgetting that the values they fight for owe their e.xist- ence to that very- same function. Without a human psy-che to receive divine inspirations and utter them in words or shape them in art, no religious symbol has ever come into the reality- of our human life. (^Ve need only think of the prophets and the evangelists.) If someone objects that there is a religious reality in itself, independent of the human psyche, I can only answer such a person svith this question : "Who says this, if not a human psyche?" No matter what we assert, we can never get a^vay from the existence of the psyche -- for 'ive are contained ^vithin it, and it is the only means by ^vhich we can grasp reality. Thus the modem discovery of the uncon- scious shuts one door forever. It deSnitely ex- cludes the Ulusoiy' idea, so favored by some individuals, that a man can kno^^' spiritual reality in itself. In modem physics, too, a door has been closed by Heisenberg's "principle of indeterminacy," shutting out the delusion that ^ve can comprehend an absolute physical re- ality. The discovety of the unconscious, how- ever, compensates for the loss of these beloved illusions by opening before us an immense and unexplored new field of realizations, \sdthin which objective scientific investigation com- bines in a strange new way \vith personal ethical adventure. But, as I said at the outset, it is practically impossible to impart the ^vhole reality of one's experience in the new field. Much is unique and can be only partially communicated by language. Here, too, a door is shut against the illusion that one can completely understand another person and tell him what is right for him. Once again, however, one can find a com- pensation for this in the ne^v realm of experi- ence by the discover)^ of the social function of the Self, ^vhich works in a hidden way' to unite separate individuals who belong together. Intellectual chit-chat is thus replaced by meaningful events that occur in the reality of the psyche. Hence, for the individual to enter seriously into the process of individuation in the way that has been outlined means a completely new and different orientation toward life. For scientists it also means a ne^v and different scientific approach to outer facts. How this n'ill work out in the field of human knowledge and in the social life of human beings cannot be predicted. But to me it seems certain that Jung's discovery of the process of indi\'iduation is a fact that future generations will have to take into account if they want to avoid drifting into a stagnant or even regressive outlook. This painting (by ErhardJacoby) illustratesthe factthateach of us, perceivingtheworldthrough an individual psyche, perceives it in a slightly differentwayfrom others.Theman,woman,and child arelooking atthesamescene ; but, foreach, different detailsbecome clear orobscured. Onlybymeans of ourconsciousperceptiondoesthe world exist"outside" :We are surrounded bysomething completely unknown and unknowable (here representedbythe painting's greybackground). 4 Symbolism in the visual arts Aniela Jatfe Variation withinaSphere no. 10:TheSun,by Richard Lippold Symbolism in the visual arts Sacred symbols -- ^the stone and the animal < The history of sjonbolism shows that everything can assume symbolic significance ; natural objects (like stones, plants, animals, men, moun- tains and valleys, sun and moon, wind, water, and fire), or man-made things (like houses, boats, or cars), or even abstract forms (like num- bers, or the triangle, the square, and the circle). In fact, the whole cosmos is a potential symbol. Man, with his symbol-making propensity, unconsciously transforms objects or forms into symbols (thereby endowing them with great psy- chological importance) and expresses them in both his religion and his visual art. The inter- twined history of religion and art, reaching back to prehistoric times, is the record that our ances- tors have left of the symbols that were mean- ingful and moving to them. Even today, as modem painting and sculpture show, the inter- play of religion and art is stUl alive. For the first part of my discussion of sym- bolism in the visual arts, I intend to examine some of the specific motifs that have been uni- versally sacred or mysterious to man. Then, for the remainder of the chapter, I wish to discuss the phenomenon of 20th-century art, not in terms of its use of symbols, but in terms of its significance as a symbol itself -- a symbolic expression of the psychological condition of the modem world. In the following pages, I have chosen three recurring motifs with which to illustrate the presence and nature of symbolism in the art of many different periods. These are the symbols of the stone, the animal, and the circle -- each of which has had enduring psychological signi- ficance from the earliest expressions of human consciousness to the most sophisticated forms of 20th-century art. We know that even unhewn stones had a highly symbolic meaning for ancient and primi- tive societies. Rough, natural stones were often believed to be the dwelling places of spirits or gods, and were used in primitive cultures as tombstones, boundary stones, or objects of reli- gious veneration. Their use may be regarded as a primeval form of sculpture -- a first attempt to invest the stone withmore expressive power than chance and nature could give it. The Old Testament story of Jacob's dream is a typical example of how, thousands of years ago, man felt that a living god or a divine spirit was embodied in the stone and ho^v the stone became a symbol: And Jacob . . . went to^va^d Haran. And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of the place, and put them for his pil- lows and lay do\sTi in that place to sleep. And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven, and behold the angels of God ascending and descend- ing on it. And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac : the land whereon thou liest, to thee \vdll I give it, and to thy seed. And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in thb place; and I knew it not. And he was afraid, and said. How dreadful is this place ! this is none otlier but the house of God, and tliis is the gate of heaven. And Jacob rose up early in the morning and took die stone that he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon die top of it. And he called the name of that place Beth-el. For Jacob, the stone was an integral part of the revelation. It was the mediator between himself and God. Inmany primitive stone-sanctuaries, the deity is represented not by a single stone but by a great many unheivn stones, arranged in distinct patterns. (The geometrical stone alignments in Brittany and the stone circle at Stonehenge are famous examples.) Arrangements of rough natural stones also play a considerable part in the highly civilized rock gardens of Zen Buddhism. Their arrangement is not geometrical but seems to have come about by pure chance. In fact, however, it is the expression of a most refined spirituahty. Very early in history', men began trying to express what they felt to be the soul or spirit of a rock by working it into a recognizable form. In many cases, the form was a more or less de- finite approximation to the human figure -- ^for instance, the ancient menhirs with their crude outlines of faces, or the herniae that developed out of boundary stones in ancient Greece, or the Above left, the stone alignments atCarnac in Brittany, datingfrom c.2000 B.c. -- crudestones set upright in rows that arethought to have been used in sacred rituals and religious processions. Left, rough stones resting on rakedsand in aZen Buddhist rockgarden (in the Ryoanjitemple,Japan).Though apparently haphazard, the stones' arrangement in factexpresses a highly refined spirituality. Right, a prehistoric menhir -- a rock that hasbeen slightlycarved into a female form (probably a mother goddess). Far right, a sculpture by Max Ernst (born 1891 ) has also hardly altered the natural shape of the stone. many primitive stone idols with human features. The animation of the stone must be explained as the projection of a more or less distinct content of the unconscious into the stone. The primitive tendency to give merely a hint of a human figure, and to retain much of the stone's natural form, can also be seen in modem sculpture. Many examples show the artists' concern tvith the "self-expression" of the stone ; to use the language of myth, the stone is allowed to "speak for itself." This can be seen, for instance, in the work of the Swiss sculptor Hans Aeschbacher, the American sculptor James Rosati, and the German-bora artist Max Ernst. In a letter from Maloja in 1935, Ernst wrote: "Alberto [the Swiss artist Giacometti] and I are afflicted with sculpturitis. We work on granite boulders, large and small, from the moraine of the Fomo glacier. Wonderfully pol- ished by time, frost, and weather, they are in themselves fantastically beautiful. No human hand can do that. So why not leave the spade- work to the elements, and confine ourselves to scratching on them the runes of our own mystery?" What Ernst meant by "mystery" is not ex- plained. But later in this chapter I shall try to show that the "mysteries" of the modem artist are not very different from those of the old masters ^vho knew the "spirit of the stone." The emphasis on this "spirit" in much sculp- ture is one indication of the shifting, indefinable borderline between religion and art. Sometimes one cannot be separated from the other. The same ambivalence can also be seen in another symbolic motif, as it appears in age-old works of art : the symbol of the animal. Animal pictures go back to the Ice Age (i.e., between 60,000 and 10,000 b.c.). They were discovered on the walls of caves in France and Spain at the end of the last century, but it was not until early in the present century that archaeologists began to realize their extreme importance and to inquire into their meaning. These inquiries revealed an infinitely remote prehistoric culture whose existence had never even been suspected. Even today, a strange magic seems to haunt the caves that contain the rock engravings and paintings. According to the German art his- torian Herbert Kiihn, inhabitants of the areas in Africa, Spain, France, and Scandinavia where such paintings are found could not be induced to go near the caves.A kind of religious awe, or perhaps a fear of spirits hovering among the rocks and the paintings, held them back. Passing nomads still lay their votive offerings before the old rock paintings in North Africa. In the 15th century. Pope Calixtus II prohibited religious ceremonies in the "cave with the horse- pictures." Which cave the pope meant is not known, but there can be no doubt that it was a cave of the Ice Age cdntaim'ng animal pictures. All this goes to prove that the caves and rocks ^34 Far left, animal paintingson cave walls at Lascaux.The paintings were notsimplydecorative ; they had a magical (unction. Left, a drawing of a bisoncovered with arrowand spearmarks :Thecave dwellers believed that byritually "killing" the image, theywould be more likely to killthe animal. Eventodaythe destruction of an effigy or statue is a symbolic killing ofthe person depicted. Right, a statue of Stalin destroyed by Hungarian rebels in 1956; far right, rebelshang a bust of the former Stalinist Hungarian premier Matyas Rakosi. with the animal paintings have always been instinctively felt to be what they originally were -- religions places. The mnnen of the place has outlived the centuries. In a number of caves the modem vbitor must travel through low, dark, and damp passages till he reaches the point where the great painted "chambers" suddenly open out. Thus arduous approach may express the desire of tlic primi- tive men to safeguard from common sight all that was contained and went on in tlie caves, and to protect their mystcrj-. The sudden and une.xpected sight of tlie paintings in the cham- bers, coming after the difiicult and awe-inspir- ing approach, must have made an ovcnvhelm- ing impression on primitive man. The Paleolithic cave paintings consist almost entirely of figures of animab, svhosc movements and postures have been observed in nature and rendered with great artbtic skill. There are,how- ever, many details that show that the figures were intended to be something more tlian natur- albtic reproductions. Kiihn svrites : "The strange thing is that a good many primitive paintings have been used as targets. At Monte- span there is an engrasing of a horse that b being driven into a trap; it is pitted with the marks of missiles. A clay model of a bear in the same cave has 42 holes." These pictures suggest a hunting-magic like that still practiced today by hunting tribes in Africa. The painted animal has the function of a "double" ; by its symbolic slaughter, the hunters attempt to anticipate and ensure the death of the real animal. Tin's is a form of sym- p.athctic magic, which b based on the "reality" of a double represented in a picture : What happens to the picture will happen to the original. The underlying ps)xhological fact b a strong identification between a living being and its image, which b considered to be the being's soul. (This is one reason rvhy a great many primitive people today will shrink from being photographed.) Other cave pictures must have served magic fertility rites. They show animals at the moment of mating; an e.xample can be seen in the figures of a male and female bbon in the Tuc d'Audubert cave in France. Thus the realis- tic picture of the animals was enriched by overtones of magic and took on a symbolic sig- nificance. It became the image of the living essence of the animal. The most interesting figures in the cave paintings are those of semihuman beings in animal dbgube, which arc sometimes to be found besides the animals. In the Trois Freres cave in France, a man wrapped in an animal hide b playing a primitive flute as if he meant to put a spell on the animab. In the same cave, there is a dancing liuman being, ^v'ith antlers, a horse's head, and bear's pa\s's. This figure, dom- inating a medley of several hundred animals, b unquestionably the "Lord of the Animals." The customs and usages of some primitive African tribes today can throw some light on the meaning of these mysterious and doubtless symbolic figures. In initiations, secret societies, and even the institution of monarchy in these tribes, animals and animal disguises often play an important part. The king and chief are ani- mals too -- generally lions or leopards. Vestiges of this custom may still be discerned in the title of the emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie ("The Lion of Judah"), or the honorific name of Dr. Hastings Banda ("The Lion of Nyasaland"). The further back we go in time, or the more primitive and close to nature the society is, the more literally such titles must be taken. A pri- mitive chief is not only disguised as the animal ; when he appears at initiation rites in full animal disguise, he is the animal. Still more, he is an animal spirit, a terrifying demon who per- forms circumcision. At such moments he incor- porates or represents the ancestor of the tribe and the clan, and therefore the primal god himself. He represents, and is, the "totem" animal. Thus we probably should not go far wrong in seeing in the figure of the dancing animal-man in the Trois Freres cave a kind of chief who has been transformed by his disguise into an animal demon. In the course of time, the complete animal disguise was superseded in many places by ani- mal and demon masks. Primitive men lavished all their artistic skill on these masks, and many of them are still unsurpassed in the power and intensity of their expression. They are often the objects of the same veneration as the god or demon himself. Animal masks play a part in the folk arts of many modern countries, like Switzer- land, or in the magnificently expressive masks of the ancient Japanese No drama, which is still performed in modern Japan. The symbolic function of the mask is the same as that of the original animal disguise. Individual human ex- pression is submerged, but in its place the wearer assumes the dignity and the beauty (and also the horrifying expression) of an animal demon. In psychological terms, the mask trans- forms its wearer into an archetypal image. Dancing, which was originally nothing more than a completion of the animal disguise by appropriate movements and gestures, was prob- ably supplementary to the initiation or other rites. It was, so to speak, performed by demons in honor of a demon. In the soft clay of the Tuc d'Audubert cave, Herbert Kiihn found foot- prints that led round animal figures. They show that dancing was part of even the Ice Age rites. "Only heel prints can be seen," Kuhn writes. "The dancers had moved like bisons. They had danced a bison dance for the fertility and in- crease of the animals and for their slaughter." In his introductory chapter. Dr. Jung has pointed out the close relation, or even identifi- Far left, a prehistoric painting from Trois Frferes cave includes (lower right corner) a human figure, perhaps a shaman, with horns and hoofs. As examples of "animal" dances; left, a Burmese buffalo dance in which masked dancers are possessed by the buffalo spirit; right, a Bolivian devil dance in which the dancers wear demonic animal masks; far right, an old southwest German folk dance in which the dancers are disguised as witches and as animal-like "wild men." cation, between the native and his totem animal (or "bush-soul"). There are special ceremonies for the establishment of this relationship, especi- ally the initiation rites for boj's. The boy enters into possession of his "animal soul," and at the same time sacrifices his own "animal being" by circiuncision. This dual process admits him to the totem clan and establishes his relationship to his totem animal. Above all, he becomes a man, and (in a still ^sider sense) ahuman being. East Coast Africans described the uncircum- cised as "animals." They have neither received an animal soul nor sacrificed their "animality." In other Avords, since neither the human nor the animal aspect of an uncircumcised boy's soul has become conscious, his animal aspect ivas re- garded as dominant. The animal motif is usually symbolic of man's primitive and instinctual nature. Even cholized men must realize the %aolence of their instinctual drives and their powerlessness in face of the autonomous emodons erupting from the unconscious. This is still more the case with primidve men, whose consciousness is not highly developed and who are still less well equipped to weather the emotional storm. In the first chapter of this book, ^vhen Dr. Jung is discus- sing the wa)*s in which man developed the po\ver of reflection, he takes an example of an African who fell into a rage and killed his beloved little son. When the man recovered himself, he -ivas overwhelmed ^vith grief and re- morse for what he had done. In this case a negative impulse broke loose and did its deadly work regardless of the conscious will. The ani- mal demon is a highly expressive symbol for such an impulse. The rividness and concrete- ness of the image enables man to establish a relationship ^^-ith it as a representative of the ovenvhelming power in himself. He fears it and seeks to propitiate it by sacrifice and ritual. A large number of m)ths are concerned %vith a primal animal, which must be sacrificed in the cause of fertility or even creation. One ex- ample of this is the sacrifice of a bull by the Persian sun-god Mithras, from which sprang the earth with all ^^•ealth and fruitfulness. In the Christian legend of St. George slaying the dragon, the primeval rite of sacrificial slaughter again appears. In the religions and religious art of practi- cally every race, animal attributes are ascribed to the supreme gods, or the gods are repre- sented as animals. The ancient Babylonians translated their gods into the heavens in the shape of the Ram, the Bull, the Crab, the Lion, the Scorpion, the Fish, and so on -- the signs of the Zodiac. The Eg)'ptians represented the god- dess Hathor as co\s'-headed, the god Amon as ram-headed, and Thoth as ibis-headed or in the shape of a baboon. Ganesh, the Hindu god of good fortune, has a human body but the head of an elephant,Vishnu is a boar,Hanuman isan ape-god, etc. (The Hindus, incidentally, do not assign the first place in the hierarchy of being to man : The elephant and lion stand higher.) Greek mythology is full of animal sym- bolism. Zeus, the father of the gods, often approaches a girl whom he desires in the shape of a swan, a bull, or an eagle. In Germanic mythology, the cat is sacred to the goddess Freya, while the boar, the raven, and the horse are sacred to Wotan. Even in Christianity, animal symbolism plays a surprisingly great part. Three of the Evange- lists have animal emblems : St. Luke has the ox, St. MEurk the lion, and St. John the eagle. Only one, St. Matthew, is represented as a man or as an angel. Christ himself symbolically appears as the Lamb of God or the Fish, but he is also the serpent exalted on the cross, the lion, and in rarer cases the unicorn. These animal attributes of Christ indicate that even the Son of God (the supreme personification of man) can no more dispense with his animal nature than with his higher, spiritual nature. The sub- human as well as the superhuman is felt to be- long to the realm of the divine ; the relationship of these two aspects of man is beautifully sym- bolized in the Christmas picture of the birth of Christ, in a stable among animals. The boundless profusion of animal symbolism in the religion and art of all times does not Left, a mask used in the ancient Nodrama ofJapan, inwhich the players often portraygods, spirits, ordemons.Above right, a No actor dons hismask before a performance. Below right, an actor inJapan's Kabukidrama,dressed as a medieval hero,with mask-iike make-up. merely emphasize the importance of bol ; it shows how vital it is for men to into their lives the symbol's psychic c instinct. In itself, an animal is neither g e\'il; it is a piece of nature. It cann< anything that is not in its nature. Tr another way, it obeys its instincts. stincts often seem mysterious to us, have their parallel in human life : Tl. tion of human nature is instinct. My But in man, the "animal being" (\s'i in him as his instinctual psyche) may > dangerous if it is not recognized and integ in life. Man is the only creature ^vith the g iA . to control instinct by his own will, but he is ^ able to suppress, distort, and wound it -- an( animal, to speak metaphorically, is never so ' •?- and dangerous as when it is wounded. S pressed instincts can gain control of aman ; they can even destroy him. The familiar dream in ^vhich the dreamer is pursued by an animal nearly always indicates that an instinct has been spUt off from consci- ousness and ought to be (or is trying to be) re- admitted and integrated into life. The more dangerous the beha\'ior of the animal in the dream, the more unconscious is the primitive and instinctual soul of the dreamer, and the more imperative is its integration into his life if some irreparable evil is to be forestalled. Suppressed and wounded instincts are the dangers threatening civilized man ; uninhibited drives are the dangers threatening primitive man. In both cases the "animal" is alienated from its true nature ; and for both, the accept- ance of the animal soul is the condition for wholeness and a fully lived life. Primitive man must tame the animal in himself and make it his helpful companion ; civilized man must heal the animal in himself and make it his friend. Other contributors to this book have discussed the importance of the stone and animal motifs in terms of dream and myth ; I have used them here only as general examples of the appearance of such living symbols throughout the history of art (and especially religious art). Let us now examine in the same way a most powerful and universal symbol ; the circle. common circular mandala. They represent the wholeness of the psyche or Self, of which con- sciousness is just as much a part as the unconscious. In both the triangle yantras and the sculptural representations of the union of Shiva and Shakti, the emphasis lies on a tension be- tween the opposites. Hence the marked erotic and emotional character ofmany of them. This dynamic quality implies a process -- the creation, or coming into being, of ^vholeness -- while the four- or eight-rayed circle represents wholeness Examples ofanimal symbols of divinities fromthree religions : Topof page,the Hindu god Ganesha (a painted sculpturefromthe Royal Palace of Nepal),god of prudenceandwisdom;above .the GreekgodZeus in theform of a swan (with Leda) ; right,on opposite sides of a medieval coin,the crucified Christshown as aman and as a serpent. of an elephant,Vishnu is a boar,Hanuman isan ape-god, etc. (The Hindus, incidentally, do not assign the first place in the hierarchy of being to man : The elephant and lion stand higher.) Greek mythology is full of animal sym- bolism. Zeus, the father of the gods, often approaches a girl whom he desires in the shape of a swan, a bull, or an eagle. In Germanic mythology, the cat is sacred to the goddess Freya, while the boar, the raven, and the horse are sacred to Wotan. Even in Christianity, animal symbolism plays a surprisingly great part. Three of the Evange- lists have animal emblems : St. Luke has the ox, St. Mark the lion, and St. John the eagle. Only one, St. Matthew, is represented as a man or as an angel. Christ himself symbolically appears as^th^Laml? of Qod or the Fish, but he god Brahma, standing oI^*k"l^agej-th&Jion^_^ petaled lotus, turned his eyes to the four points of the compass. This fourfold survey from the circle of the lotus was a kind of preliminary orientation, an indispensable taking of bearings, before he began his work of creation. A similar story is told of Buddha. At the moment of his birth, a lotus flower rose from the earth and he stepped into it to gaze into the 10 directions of space. (The lotus in this case was eight-rayed; and Buddha also gazed upward and downward, making 10 directions.) This symbolic gesture of survey was the most concise method of showing that from the moment of his birth, the Buddha was a unique personality, predestined to receive illumination. His person- ality and his further existence were given the imprint of wholeness. The spatial orientation performed by Brahma and Buddhamay be regarded as symbolic of the human need for psychic orientation. The four functions of consciousness described by Dr. Jung in his chapter, p. 61 -- thought, feeling, intui- tion, and sensation -- equip man to deal with the impressions of the world he receives from within and without. It is by means of these functions that he comprehends and assimilates his experience ; it is by means of them that he can respond. Brahma's four-fold survey of the universe symbolizes the necessary integration of ^^^pur functions thatman must achieve. (In circle is often eight-rayed. This expresses ^^^^.ocal overlapping of the four functions of ousness, so that four further intermediate come about -- ^for instance, thought I pd by feeling or intuition, or feeling tend- toward sensation.) In the visual art of India and the Far East, I four- or eight-rayed circle is the usual pat- ,m of the religious images that serve as instm- [ -.lents of meditation. In Tibetan Lamaism , Specially, richly figured mandalas play an important part. As a rule, these mandalas repre- sent the cosmos in its relation to divine powers. But a great many of the eastern meditation figures are purely geometrical in design; these are called yantras. Aside from the circle, a very common yantra motif is formed by two inter- penetrating triangles, one point-upward, the other point-dowmvard. Traditionally, this shape symbolizes the union of Shiva and Shakti, the male and female divinities, a subject that also appears in sculpture in countless variations. In terms of psychological symbolism, it expresses the union of opposites -- the union of the per- sonal, temporal world of the ego wth the non-personal, timeless world of the non-ego. Ultimately, this union is the fulfillment and goal of all religions : It is the union of the soul wth- God. The t^vo interpenetrating triangles have a symbolic meaning similar to that of the more Right, a yantra (a form ofmandala), composed of nine linked triangles. Themandala,symbolizing wholeness, is often connected with exceptional beings ofmyth or legend. Far right, aTibetan painting ofthe birth of Buddha ; inthe lower left corner, Buddha takeshis firststepson a crossformed ofcircularblossoms. Above right,the birth ofAlexander the Great (a 16th-centurymanuscript illustration) heralded by comets -- in circular ormandala form. iiAmctw'^fmtvcj«t{«yytt<nurtA Atr-Tirfcim JftW 5*fiv(tnT^ ^(v (tt (Oitr^u ^loxM ftxctCdvC^ct feflcj -- -- * f- <^«t'it^':urvi?nt^S3S ^S3artAt } noGR* ^^5t'jtfnwisiz] ItfaVxtWxnfctuoOCc^vn^ common circular mandala. They represent the wholeness of the psj'che or Self, of which con- sciousness is just as much a part as the unconscious. In both the triangle yantras and the sculptural representations of the miion of Shiva and Shakti, the emphasis lies on a tension be- tween the opposites. Hence the marked erotic and emotional character of many of them. This dynamic quality implies a process -- the creation, or coming into being, of wholeness -- while the four- or eight-rayed circle represents ^vholeness as such, as an existing entity. The abstract circle also figures in Zen paint- ing. Speaking of a pictme entided The Circle, by the famous Zen priest Sangai, another Zen master \mtes : "In the Zen sect, the circle re- presents enhghtenment. It symbolizes human perfection." Abstract mandalas also appear in European Christian art. Some of the most splendid examples are the rose windo\s's of the cathedrals. These are representations of the Self of man transposed onto the cosmic plane. (A cosmic mandala in the shape of a shining white rose was revealed to Dante in a vision.) We may re- gard as mandalas the haloes of Christ and the Christian saints in religious paintings. In many cases, the halo of Christ is alone divided into four, a significant allusion to his sufferings as the Son ofMan and his death on the Cross, and at the same time a symbol of his differentiated wholeness. On the walls of early Romanesque churches, abstract circular figures can some- times be seen; they may go back to pagan originals. In non-Christian art, such circles are called "sun wheels." They appear in rock engravings that date back to the neolithic epoch before the wheel was invented. As Jung has j>ointed out, the term "sun wheel" denotes only the external aspect of the figure. ^Vhat really mattered at all times -was the experience of an archetypal, Left,an exampleofthe mandala in religious architecture ;theAngkor Wat Buddhisttemple in Cambodia.O a square buildingwith eritrarfcesat thefour corners. Right, the ruins of a fortifiedcamp in Denmark (c. A.D. 1 000),whichwas laid out in a circle -- as isthe fortresstown (center right) of Palmanova, Italy (built in 1 593),with its star- shaped fortifications. Far right, 1 0 streetsmeetat L'Etoile, Paris, toform a mandala. inner image, which Stone Age man rendered in his art as faithfully as he depicted bulls, gazelles, or wild horses. Many pictorial mandalas are to be found in Christian art : for example, the rather rare pic- ture of the Virgin in the center of a circular tree, which is the God-symbol of the burning bush. The most widely current mandalas in Christian art are those of Christ surrounded by the four Evangelists. These go back to the ancient Egyptian representations of the god Horns and his four sons. In architecture the mandala also plays an important part -- but one that often passes unnoticed. It forms the ground plan both of secular and sacred buildings in nearly all civili- zations; it enters into classical, medieval, and evenmodem town planning.A classical example appears in Plutarch's account of the foundation of Rome. According to Plutarch, Romulus sent for builders from Etruriawho instructed him by sacred usages and written rules about all the ceremonies to be observed -- in the sameway "as in the mysteries." First they dug a round pit where the Comitium, or Court of Assembly, now stands, and into this pit they threw symbolic offerings of the fmits of the earth. Then each man took a small piece of earth of the land from which he came, and these were all thrown into the pit together. The pit was given the name of mundus (which also meant the cosmos). Round it Romulus drew the boundary of the city in a circle with a plow drawn by a bull and a cow. Wherever a gate was planned, the plowshare was taken out and the plow carried over. The city founded in this solemn ceremony was circular in shape. Yet the old and famous description of Rome is urbs quadrata, the square city. According to one theory that attempts to reconcile this contradiction, the word quadrata must be understood to mean "quadripartite" ; that is, the circular city was divided into four parts by two main arteries running from north to south and west to east. The point of intersection coincided with the mundus mentioned by Plutarch. According to another theory, the contradic- tion can be understood only as a symbol, namely as a visual representation of the mathematically insoluble problem of the squaring of the circle, which had greatly preoccupied the Greeks and was to play so great a part in alchemy. Strangely enough, before describing the circle ceremony of the foundation of the city by Romulus, Plutarch also speaks of Rome as Roma quad- rata, a square city. For him, Rome was both a circle and a square. In each theory a true mandala is involved, and that links up with Plutarch's statement that the foundation of the city was taught by the Etruscans "as in the mysteries," as a secret rite. It was more than a mere outward form. By its mandala ground plan, the city, with its inhabi- tants, is exalted above the purely secular realm. This is further emphasized by the fact that the city has a center, the mundus, which established the city's relationship to the "other" realm, the abode of the ancestral spirits. (The mundus was coveredby a great stone, called the "soul stone." On certain days the stone was removed, and then, it was said, the spirits of the dead rose from the shaft.) A number of medieval cities were founded on the ground plan of a mandala and were surrounded by an approximately circular wall. In such a city, as in Rome, two main arteries divided it into "quarters" and led to the four gates. The church or cathedral stood at the point of intersection of these arteries. The in- spiration of the medieval city with its quarters was the Heavenly Jerusalem (in the Book of Revelations), which had a square ground plan and walls ^s'ith three times four gates. But Jeru- salem had no temple at its center, for God's immediate presence was the center of it. (The mandala ground plan for a city is by no means outmoded. A modem example is the city of Washington, D.C.) Every building, sacred or secular, that has a mandala ground plan is the projection of an archetypal image from within the human vm- conscious onto the outer world. The city, the fortress, and the temple become symbols of psychic ^vholeness, and in this way exercise a specific influence on the human being who enters or lives in the place. (It need hardly be emphasized that even in architecture the pro- jection of the psychic content tvas a purely un- conscious process. "Such things cannot be tliought up," Dr. Jung has tvritten, 'Taut must grow again from the forgotten depths if they are to express the deepest insights of consciousness The Renaissance interest in outer realityproducedtheCopernican sun- centered universe (left) andturned artistsawayfrom"imaginative" art to nature : Below left, Leonardo's study ofthehuman heart. Renaissance art -- with itssensuous concern with light, nature,and the body (far left, a Tintoretto, 1 6th century) -- set a pattern that lasted until the Impressionists. Below, a painting by Renoir (1841 -191 9). center moved upward until the cross took on the Latin form, with the stake and the cross- beam, that is customary today. This develop- ment is important because it corresponds to the inward development of Christianity up to the high Middle Ages. In simple terms, it symbo- lized the tendency to remove the center of man and his faith from the earth and to "elevate" it into the spiritual sphere. This tendency sprang from the desire to put into action Christ's say- ing : "My kingdom is not of this world." Earthly life, the world, and the body were therefore forces that had to be overcome. Medieval man's hopes were thus directed to the beyond, for it was only from paradise that the promise of fulfillment beckoned. This endeavor reached its climax in the Middle Ages and in medieval mysticism. The hopes of the beyond found expression not only in the raising of the center of the cross ; it can also be seen in the increasing height of the Gothic cathedrals, which seem to set the laws o£ gravity at defiance. Their cruciform ground plan is that of the elongated Latin cross (though 'tihrioTiced. It 'tdmis the 'ground plan both of secular and sacred buildings in nearly all civili- zations; it enters into classical, medieval, and evenmodem town planning.A classiceil example appears in Plutarch's account of the foundation of Rome. According to Plutarch, Romulus sent for builders from Etmriawho instructed himby sacred usages and written rules about all the ceremonies to be observed -- in the same way "as in the mysteries." First they dug a round pit where the Comitium, or Court of Assembly, now stands, and into this pit they threw symbolic offerings of the fruits of the earth. Then each man took a small piece of earth of the landfrom which he came, and these were all thrown into the pit together. The pit was given the name of mundus (which also meant the cosmos). Round it Romulus drew the boundary of the city in a circle with a plow drawn by a bull and a cow. Wherever a gate was planned, the plowshare \vas taken out and the plow carried over. The city founded in this solemn ceremony was circular in shape. Yet the old and famous the baptisteries, with the font in the center, have a true mandala ground plan.) With the dawning of the Renaissance, a revo- lutionary change began to occur in man's con- ception of the world. The "upward" movement (which reached its climax in the late Middle Ages) went into reverse; man turned back to the earth. He rediscovered the beauties of nature and the body, began the first circumnavi- gation of the globe, and proved the world to be a sphere. The laws of mechanics and causality became the foundations of science. The world of religious feeling, of the irrational, and of mysti- cism, which had played so great a part in medie- val times, was more and more submerged by the triumphs of logical thought. Similarly, art became more realistic and sen- suous. It broke away from the religious subjects of the Middle Ages and embraced the whole visible world. It was overwhelmed by the mani- foldness of the earth, by its splendor and horror, and became what Gothic art had been before it : a true symbol of the spirit of the age. Thus it can hardly be. regarded as accidental that was to'pj'ay so ^ear a part iri alchemy.' btrahgely enough, before describing the circle ceremony of the foundation of the city by Romulus, Plutarch also speaks of Rome as Roma quad- rata, a square city. For him, Rome was both a circle and a square. In each theory a true mandala is involved, and that links up with Plutarch's statement that the foundation of the city was taught by the Etruscans "as in the mysteries," as a secret rite. It was more than a mere outward form. By its mandala ground plan, the city, with its inhabi- tants, is exalted above the purely secular realm. This is further emphasized by the fact that the city has a center, the mundus, which established the city's relationship to the "other" realm, the abode of the ancestral spirits. (The mundus was covered by a great stone, called the "soul stone." On certain days the stone was removed, and then, it was said, the spirits of the dead rose from the shaft.) A number of medieval cities were founded on the ground plan of a mandala and were a change also came over ecclesiastical build- ing. In contrast to the soaring Gothic cathedrals, there were more circular ground plans. The circle replaced the Latin cross. This change in form, however -- and this is the important point for the history of symbol- ism -- must be attributed to aesthetic, and not to religious, causes. That is the only possible ex- planation for the fact that the center of these round churches (the truly "holy" place) is empty, and that the altar stands in a recess in a wall away from the center. For that reason the plan cannot be described as a true man- dala. An important exception is St. Peter's in Rome, which was built to the plans of Bra- mante and Michelangelo. Here the altar stands in the center. One is tempted, however, to attribute this exception to the genius of the architects, for great genius is always both of and beyond its time. In spite of the far-reaching changes in art, philosophy, and science brought about by the Renaissance, the central symbol of Christianity remained unchanged. Christ was still repre- sented on the Latin cross, as he is today. That meant that the center of religious man re- mained anchored on a higher, more spiritual plane than that of earthly man, who had turned back to nature. Thus a rift arose be- tween man's traditional Christianity and his rational or intellectual mind. Since that time, these two sides ofmodem man have never been brought together. In the course of the centuries, with man's grouing insight into nature and its laws, this division has gradually grown wider; and it still splits the psyche of the western Christian in the 20th century. Of course, the brief historical summary given here has been over-simplified. Moreover, it omits the secret religious movements within Christianity that took account, in their beliefs, of what was usually ignored by most Chris- tians : tlie question of eril, the chthonic (or earthly) spirit. Such movements were ahs'ays in a minority and seldom had any very visible influence, but in their way they fulfilled the important role of a contrapuntal accompani- ment to Christian spirituality. The Renaissance interest in outer reality producedthe Copernican sun centered universe (left) and turned artists av;ayfrom ''imaginative" an to nature ; Below left. Leonardo's study ofthehuman heart. Renaissance art -- with itssensuous concern with light, nature, and the body (far left, a Tintoretto, 16th century) -- set a pattern that lasted until the Impressionists. Belov/, a painting by Renoir (1841-1919). Far left, thesymbolic alchemical conceptofthesquared circle -- symbol ofwholenessand of the union ofopposites (note the maleand female figures). Left, a modern squared circle bythe British artistBen Nicholson (born 1894) : It is a strictlygeometrical, emptyform possessing aesthetic harmonyand beautybutwithout symbolic meaning. Right, a "sun wheel" in a painting by themodernJapanese artistSofu Teshigahara (born 1900) followsthe tendency ofmanymodern painters, when using "circular" shapes, tomake them asymmetrical. Among the many sects and movements that arose about a.d. 1000, the alchemists played a very important part. They exalted the mysteries of matter and set them alongside those of the "heavenly" spirit of Christianity. What they sought was a wholeness of man encompassing mind and body, and they invented a thousand names and symbols for it. One of their central symbols was the quadratura circuli (the squar- ing of the circle), which is no more than the true mandala. The alchemists not only recorded their work in their writings ; they created a wealth of pic- tures of their dreams and visions -- symbolic pictures that are still as profound as they are baffling. They were inspired by the dark side of nature -- evil, the dream, the spirit of earth. The mode of expression was always fabulous, dreamlike, and unreal, both in word and pic- ture. The great 15th-century Flemish painter Hieronymus Bosch may be regarded as the most important representative of this kind of imaginative art. But at the same time, more typical Renais- sance painters (working in the full light of day, so to speak) were producing the most splendid works of sensuous art. Their fascination with earth and nature went so deep that it practi- cally determined the development of visual art for the next five centuries. The last great repre- sentatives of sensuous art, the art of the passing moment, of light and air, were the 19th-century impressionists. We may here discriminate between t%vo radi- cally different modes of artistic representation. Many attempts have been made to define their characteristics. Recently Herbert Kuhn (whose work on the cave-paintings I have already men- tioned) has tried to draw a distinction between what he calls the "imaginative" and the "sen- sory" style. The "sensory" style generally depicts a direct reproduction of nature or of the picture-subject. The "imaginative," on the other hand, presents a fantasy or experience of the artist in an "unrealistic," even dreamlike, and sometimes "abstract" manner. Kuhn's two con- ceptions seem so simple and so clear that I am glad to make use of them. The first beginnings of imaginative art go back very far in history. In the Mediterranean basin, its efflorescence dates from the third mil- lenium b.c. It has only recently been realized that these ancient works of art are not the results of incompetence or ignorance; they are modes of expression of a perfectly definite reli- gious and spiritual emotion. And they have a special appeal today, for, during the last half- centmy, art has been passing once more through a phase that can be described by the term "imaginative." Today the geometrical, or "abstract," symbol of the circle has again come to play a con- siderable role in painting. But with few excep- tions the traditional mode of representation has undergone a characteristic transformation that corresponds to the dilemma ofmodem man's ex- swooping bird?) again bears a loosely arranged group of bright balls or circles. Circles often appear in unexpected con- nections in the mysterious compositions of the British artist Paul Nash. In the primeval soli- tude of his landscape Event on the Downs, a ball hes in the right foreground. Though it is apparently a tennis ball, the design on its surface forms the Tai-gi-tu, the Chinese sym- bol of eternity ; thus it opens up a new dimension in the loneliness of the landscape. Something similar happens in Nash's Land- scape from a Dream. Balls are rolling out of sight in an infinitely wide mirrored land- scape, with a huge sun visible on the horizon. Another ball hes in the foreground, in front of the roughly square mirror. In his drawing Limits of Understanding, the Swiss artist Paul Klee places the simple figure of a sphere or a circle above a complex struc- Circlesappearbroken or loosely scattered in TheSunandthe Moon, top, by Robert Delaunay (1 885- 1 941 )-,\nAFew Circles, left, by Kandinsky (1866-1 944) ; and in Landscapefroma Dream, right, by Paul Nash (1889-1 946). Below, Composition by Piet Mondrian (1872-1 944) isdominated by squares. ture of ladders and lines. Dr. Jung has pointed out that a true sjinbol appeals only tvhen there is a need to express what thought cannot think or ^s-hat is only di\Tned or felt ; that is the pur- pose of Klee's simple figure at the "limits of understanding." It is important to note that the square, or groups of rectangles and squares, or rectangles and rhomboids, have appeared in modem art Just as often as the circle. The master of har- monious (indeed, "musical") compositions ^sath squares is the Dutch-bom artist Piet Mondrian. As a rule there is no actual center in any of his pictures, yet they form an ordered whole in their orm strict, almost ascetic fashion. Still more common are paintings by other artists r\-ith irr^ular quaternary' compositions, or numerous rectangles combined in more or less loose groups. The circle is a s)'mbol of the ps^-che (even Plato described the psj'che as a sphere). The square (and often the rectangle) is a s)Tnbol of earthbound matter, of the body and reality. In most modem art, the coimection betiveen these two primary forms is either nonexistent, or loose and casual. Their separation is another symbolic e.xpression of the psj-chic state of 20th-century man: His soul has lost its roots and he is threatened by dissocia- tion. Even in the world situation of today (as Dr. Jung pointed out in his opening chap- ter), this split has become e-vident : The IS'est- em and Eastern halves of the earth are separ- ated by an Iron Curtain. But the frequency rsith which the square and the circle appear must not be overlooked. There seems to be an uninterrupted ps)'chic urge to bring into consciousness the basic factors of life that they sr'mbolize. Also, in certain abstract pictures of our time (rvhich merely represent a colored structure or a kind of "primal matter"), these forms occasionally appear as if they were germs of new growth. The stmbol of the circle has played a curious part in a very different phenomenon of the life of our day, and occasionally still does so. In the last years of the Second ^Vorld War, there arose the 'Sisionary' rumor" of round fl^'ing bodies that became knocm as "fl\ing saucers" or UFOs (unidentified fi>ing objects). Jung has explained the UFOs as a projection of a ps^-- chic content (of wholeness) that has at all times been symbolized by the circle. In other tvords, this "visionary rumor," as cmi also be seen in many dreams of our time, is an attempt by the unconscious collective psyche to heal the split in our apocalyptic age by means of the symbol of the circle. Modern painting as a symbol The terms "modem art" and "modern paint- ing" are used in this chapter as the layman uses them. What I will be dealing with, to use Kuhn's term, is modern imaginative painting. Pictures of this kind can be "abstract" (or rather "non-figurative") but they need not always be so. There will be no attempt to distinguish among such various forms as fauvism, cubism, expressionism, futurism, Suprematism, constrac- tivism, orphism, and so on. Any specific allu- sion to one or the other of these groups will be quite exceptional. And I am not concerned with an aesthetic differentiation of modem paintings ; nor, above all, with artistic evaluations. Modem imagina- tive painting is here taken simply as a phenome- non of our time. That is the only way in which the question of its symbolic content can be justi- fied and answered. In this brief chapter it is pos- sible to mention only a very few artists, and to select a few of their works more or less at ran- dom. I must content myself with discussing modem painting in terms of a small number of its representatives. My starting point is the psychological fact that the artist has at all times been the instm- ment and spokesman of the spirit of his age. His work can be only partly understood in terms of his personal psychology. Consciously or unconsciously, the artist gives form to the nature and values of his time, which in their turn form him. The modern artist himself often recognizes the interrelation of the work of art and its time. Thus the French critic and painter Jean Baz- aine writes in his Notes on Contemporary Painting ; "Nobody paints as he likes. All a painter can do is to will with all his might the painting his age is capable of." The German artist Franz Marc, who died in the First World War, said ; "The great artists do not seek their forms in the mist of the past, but take the deep- est soundings they can of the genuine, pro- foundest center of gravity of their age." And, as far back as 1911, Kandinsky wrote in his famous essay "Concerning the Spiritual in Art" : "Every epoch is given its own measure of artistic freedom, and even the most creative genius may not leap over the boundary of that freedom." For the last 50 years, "modern art" has been a general bone of contention, and the discussion has lost none of its heat. The "yeas" are as passionate as the "nays" ; yet the reiterated prophecy that "modem" art is finished has never come true. The new way of expression has been triumphant to an unimagined degree. If it is threatened at all, it will be because it has degenerated into mannerism and modish- ness. (In the Soviet Union, where non-figura- tive art has often been officially discouraged and produced only in private, figurative art is threatened by a similar degeneration.) The general public, in Europe at any rate, is still in the heat of the battle. The violence of the discussion shows that feeling runs high in both camps. Even those who are hostile to modem art cannot avoid being impressed by the works they reject ; they are irritated or re- pelled, but (as the violence of their feelings shows) they are moved. As a rule, the negative fascination is no less strong than the positive. The stream of visitors to exhibitions of modem art, wherever and whenever they take place, testifies to something more than curiosity. Curiosity would be satisfied sooner. And the fantastic prices that are paid for works of modern art are a measure of the status con- ferred upon them by society. Fascination arises when the unconscious has been moved. The effect produced by works of modern art cannot be explained entirely by their visible form. To the eye trained in "clas- sic" or "sensory" art, they are new and alien. Nothing in works of non-figurative art reminds the spectator of his own world -- no objects in their otra everyday surroundings, no human being or animal that speaks a familiar lan- guage. There is no tvelcome, no visible accord in the cosmos created by the artist. And yet, without any question, there is a human bond. It may be even more intense than in works of sensory art, which make a direct appeal to feel- ing and empathy. It is the aim of the modem artist to give expression to his inner vision of man, to the spiritual background of life and the world. The modem work of art has abandoned not only the realm of the concrete, "natural," sensuous world, but also that of the individual. It has become highly collective and therefore (even in the abbreviation of the pictorial hieroglyph) touches not only the fetv but the many. What remains individual is the manner of represen- tation, the style and quality of the modem work of art. It is often difficult for the lajTOan to recognize whether the artist's intentions are genuine and his expressions spontaneous, neither imitated nor aimed at effect. In many cases he must accustom himself to new kinds of line and color. He must learn them, as he tvould leam a foreign language, before he can judge their expressiveness and quality. The pioneers of modem art have apparently understood hotv much they tvere asking of the public. Never have artists published so many "manifestoes" and explanations of their aims as in the 20th century. It is, however, not only to others that they are striving to explain and justify what they are doing; it is also to them- selves. For the most part, these manifestoes are artistic confessions of faith -- poetic and often confused or self-contradictory attempts to give clarity to the strange outcome of today's artistic activities. What really matters, of course, is (and always has been) the direct encounter with the work of art. Yet, for the psychologist who is concerned with the symbolic content of modem art, the study of these writings is most instmc- tive. For that reason the artists, wherever pos- sible, will be allowed in the following discus- sion to speak for themselves. The beginnings of modem art appeared in the early 1900s. One of the most impressive personalities of that initiatory phase was Kan- dinsky, whose influence is stUl clearly traceable in the paintings of the second half of the cen- tury. Many of his ideas have proved prophetic. In his essay "Concerning Form," he writes: "The art of today embodies the spiritual ma- tured to the point of revelation. The forms of this embodiment may be arranged bettveen two poles: (1) great abstraction; (2) great realism. These two poles open two paths, which both lead to one goal in the end. These two elements have always been present in art ; the firstwas ex- pressed in the second. Today it looks as if they were about to carry on separate existences. Art seems to have put an end to the pleasant com- pletion of the abstract by the concrete, and vice versa." Sensory (or representational) art I'ersi/simaginative (or"unrealistic") art : Right, a paintingbythe 1 9th- century British artistWilliam Frith, part of a sequencedepicting a gambler'sdownfall.This isone extreme of representational art ; It hasdeclined intomannerismand sentiment. Left,anextremeof imaginative (and, here,"abstract") artby Kazimir Malevich (1878-1935). Suprematist Composition. White on White. 1918. Collection, The Museum ofModernArt New York To illustrate Kandinsky's point that the two elements of art, the abstract and the concrete, have parted company: In 1913, the Russian painter Kasimir Malevich painted a picture that consisted only of a black square on a w'hite ground. It \ras perhaps the first purely "ab- stract" picture ever painted. He ^vrote of it: "In my desperate struggle to liberate art from the ballast of the ^vorld of objects, I took refuge in the form of the square." A year later, tlie French painter Marcel Duchamp set up an object chosen at random (a bottle rack) on a pedestal and exhibited it. Jean Bazaine wrote of it: "This bottle rack, tom from its utilitarian context and \s'ashed up on the beach, has been invested ^\•ith the lonely dignity of tlie derelict. Good for nothing, there to be used, ready for anything, it is alive It lives on the fringe of existence its o\vn disturbing, absurd life. The disturbing object -- that is the first step to art." In its weird dignity and abandonment, the object tvas immeasurably exalted and given significance that can only be called magical. Hence its "disturbing, absurd life." It became an idol and at the same time an object of mockery. Its intrinsic reality was annihilated. Both Maletich's square and Duchamp's bottle rack ^^•ere sjTnbolic gestures that had nothing to do wth art in tlie strict sense of the word. Yet tliey mark the two extremes ("great abstraction" and "great realism") be- tween ^vhich the imaginative art of the succeed- ing decades may be aligned and understood. From the pis^'chological standpoint, the t\vo gestures toward the naked object (matter) and the naked non-object (spirit) point to a collec- tive ps)-chic rift that created its sjTnbolic expres- sion in the years before the catastrophe of the First \Vorld ^Var. This rift had first appeared in the Renaissance, ^vhen it became manifest as a conflict between knowledge and faith. Mean- while, chilization was remo\nng man further and further from his instinctual foundation, so that a gulf opened betiveen nature and mind, behveen the unconscious and consciousness. These opposites characterize the psychic situa- tion that is seeking expression in modem art. The secret soul of things As we have seen, the starting point of "the concrete" was Duchamp's famous -- or notori- ous -- bottle rack. The bottle rack was not in- tended to be artistic in itself. Duchamp called himself an "anti-artist" But it brought to light an element that was to mean a great deal to artists for a long time to come. The name they gave to it tvas objcl Irouve or "ready-made." The Spanish painter Joan Miro, for instance, goes to the beach every dawn "to collect things washed up by the tide. Things lying there, waiting for someone to discover their person- ality." He keeps his finds in his studio. Now and then he assembles some of them and the most curious compositions result : "The artist is often surprised himself at the shapes of his own creation." As far back as 1912, the Spanish-bom artist Pablo Picasso and the French artist Georges Braque made tvhat they called "collages" from scraps of mbbish. Max Ernst cut clippings from the illustrated papers of the so-called age of big business, assembled them as the fancy took him, and so transformed the stuffy solidity of the bourgeois age into a demonic, dreamlike un- reahty. The German painter Kurt Schwitters worked with the contents of his ash can : He used nails, bro\\'n paper, ragged scraps of news- paper, railway tickets, and remnants of doth. He succeeded in assembling this rubbish ^\ith such seriousness and freshness that surprising effects of strange beauty came about. In Schwitters's obsession with things, ho\v'ever, this manner of composition occasionally became merdy absurd. He made a construction of rubbish that he called "a cathedral built for things." Schwitters worked on it for 10 years, and three stories of his own house had to be de- molished to give him the space he needed. Schwitters's work, and the magical exaltation of tire object, give the first hint of the place of modem art in the history' of the human mind, and of its sj-mbolic significance. They reveal the tradition that was being unconsciously per- petuated. It is the tradition of the hermetic Christian brotherhoods of the Middle Ages, and of the alchemists, who conferred even on matter, the stuff of the earth, the dignity of their religious contemplation. Schwitters's exaltation of the grossest material to the rank of art, to a "cathedral" (in which the rubbish would leave no room for a human being) faithfully followed the old alchemical tenet according to which the sought-for pre- cious object is to be found in filth. Kandinsky expressed the same ideas when he wrote : "Everything that is dead quivers. Not only the things of poetry, stars, moon, wood, flowers, but even a white trouser button glittering out of a puddle in the street .... Everything has a secret soul, which is silent more often than it speaks." What the artists, like the alchemists, prob- ably did not realize was the psychological fact that they were projecting part of their psyche into matter or inanimate objects. Hence the "mysterious animation" that entered into such things, and the great value attached even to rubbish. They projected their own darkness, their earthly shadow, a psychic content that they and their time had lost and abandoned. Unlike the alchemists, however, men like Schwitters were not contained in and protected by the Christian order. In one sense, Schwit- ters's work is opposed to it : A kind of mono- mania binds him to matter, while Christianity seeks tovanquishmatter. And yet, paradoxically, it is Schwitters's monomania that robs the material in his creations of its inherent signifi- cance as concrete reality. In his pictures, matter is transformed into an "abstract" composition. Therefore it begins to discard its substantiality, and to dissolve. In that very process, these pic- tures become a symbolic expression of our time, which has seen the concept of the "absolute" concreteness of matter undermined by modem atomic physics. Painters began to think about the "magic object" and the "secret soul" of things. The Italian painter Carlo Carra wrote : "It is common things that reveal those forms of simplicity through which we can realize that higher, more significant condition of being where the whole splendor of art resides." Paul Klee said : "The object expands beyond the bounds of its appearance by our knowledge that the thing is more than its exterior presents to our eyes." And Jean Bazaine wrote: "An object awakens our love just because it seems to be the bearer of powers that are greater than itself." Sayings of this kind recall the old alchemical concept of a "spirit in matter," believed to be the spirit in and behind inanimate objects like metal or stone. Psychologically interpreted, this spirit is the unconscious. It always manifests itself when conscious or rational knowledge has reached its limits and mystery sets in, for man tends to fill the inexplicable and mysterious with the contents of his unconscious. He pro- jects them, as it were, into a dark, empty vessel. The feeling that the object was "more than met the eye," which was shared by many art- ists, found a most remarkable expression in the work of the Italian painter Giorgio de Chirico. He was a mystic by temperament, and a tragic seeker who never found what he sought. On his self-portrait (1908) he wrote : Et quid amabo nisi quod aenigma est ("And what am I to love if not the enigma?"). Chirico was the founder of the so-called pittura metafisica. "Every object," he wrote, "has two aspects : The common aspect, which is the one we generally see and which is seen by everyone, and the ghostly and metaphysical aspect, which only rare individuals see at moments of clairvoyance and metaphysical meditation. A work of art must relate some- thing that does not appear in its visible form." Chirico's works reveal this "ghostly aspect" of things. They are dreamlike transpositions of reality, which arise as visions from the uncon- scious. But his "metaphysical abstraction" is expressed in a panic-stricken rigidity, and the atmosphere of the pictures is one of nightmare and of fathomless melancholy. The city squares of Italy, the towers and objects, are set in an over-acute perspective, as if they were in a vacuum, illuminated by a merciless, cold light An example of "surrealist" art : LesSouliersRouges, bythe French painter Ren6 Magritte (born 1 896). Much ofthedisturbing effect of surrealistpaintingcomesfrom its associationandjuxtaposition of unrelated objects -- often absurd, irrational, and dreamlike. from an unseen source. Antique heads or statues of gods conjure up the classical past. In one of the most terrifying of his pictures, he has placed beside the marble head of a god- dess a pair of red rubber gloves, a "magic object" in themodem sense.A green ball on the ground acts as a symbol, uniting the crass opposites ; -without it, there would be more than a hint of psychic disintegration. This picture was clearly not the result of over-sophisticated de- liberation ; it must be taken as a dream picture. Chirico ^vas deeply influenced by the philo- sophies of Nietzsche and Schopenhauer. He wrote : "Schopenhauer and Nietzsche were the first to teach the deep significance of the sense- lessness of life, and to show how this senseless- ness could be transformed into art .... The dreadful void they discovered is the very soul- less and untroubled beauty of matter." It may be doubted ^vhether Chirico succeeded in trans- posing the "dreadful void" into "untroubled beauty." Some of his pictures are extremely distmrbing; many are as terrifying as night- mares. But in his effort to find artistic expres- sion for the void, he penetrated to the core of the existential dilemma of contemporary man. Nietzsche, whom Chirico quotes as his auth- ority, has given a name to the "dreadful void" in his saving "God is dead." Without referring to Nietzsche, Kandinsky WTOte in On the Spiri- tual in Art : "Heaven is empty. God is dead." A phrase of this kind may sound abominable. But it is not new. Theideaof the "death ofGod" and its irrunediate consequence, the "meta- physical void," had troubled the minds of 19th- century poets, especially in France and Ger- many. It was a long development that, in the 20th century, reached the stage of open discus- sion and found expression in art. The cleavage between modem art and Christianity was fin- ally accomplished. Dr. Jung also came to realize that this strange and mysterious phenomenon of the death of God is a psychic fact of our time. In 1937 he wrote : "I know -- and here I am ex- pressing what countless otlier people know -- that the present time is the time of God's dis- appearance and death." For years he had ob- served the Christian God-image fading in his patients' dreams -- that is, in the unconscious of modern men. The loss of that image is the loss of the supreme factor that gives life a meaning. It must be pointed out, however, that neither Nietzsche's assertion that God is dead, nor Chirico's "metaphysical void," nor Jung's de- ductions from unconscious images, have any- thing final to say about the reality and exist- ence of God or of a transcendental being or not-being. They are human assertions. In each case they are based, as Jung has sho-wn in Psychology and Religion, on contents of the unconscious ps)xhe that have entered conscious- ness in tangible form as images, dreams, ideas, or intuitions. The origin of these contents, and the cause of such a transformation (from a li-ving to a dead God), must remain unknorvn, on the frontier of mystery. Chirico never came to a solution of the prob- lem presented to him by the unconscious. His failuremay be seen most clearly in his represen- tation of the hiunan figure. Given the present religious situation, it is man himself to whom Both Giorgiode Chirico(bom 1888) and MarcChagall (bom 1887) have soughttolookbehindtheoutward appearances ofthings ;theirwork seemsto have risenfromthedepths ofthe unconscious. But Chirico's vision {bslovJ.hisPfii/osopherand Poet) wasgloomy,melancholy,even nightmarish. Chagall'shasalways been rich,warm,and alive. Right, one of hisgreatstained-glass windov/s created in 1962fora Jerusalemsynagogue. In Chirico'sSongof£.ove (left), the marbleheadofthegoddess andtherubbergloveare crass opposites.Thegreen ballseems to actasa unitingsymbol. Right,MetephysicatMuseby Carlo Carra (bom 1881).Thefaceless manikinwasafrequenttheme of Chirico'saswell. should be accorded a new, if impersonal, dig- nity and responsibility. (Jung described it as a responsibility to consciousness.) But in Chirico's ^vork, man is deprived of his soul ; he becomes a manichino, a puppet without a face (and therefore also without consciousness). In the various versions of his Great Meta- physician, a faceless figure is enthroned on a pedestal made of rubbish. The figure is a con- sciously or unconsciously ironical representation of the man who strives to discover the "truth" about metaphj'sics, and at the same time a symbol of ultimate loneliness and senselessness. Or perhaps the manichini (which also haimt the works of other contemporary artists) are a premonition of the faceless mass man. ^S^hen he was 40, Chirico abandoned his pit- tura metafisica; he burned back to traditional modes, but his ^vork lost depth. Here is certain proof that there is no "back to where you came from" for the creative mind whose unconscious has been involved in the fundamental dilemma of modem existence. A counterpart to Chirico might be seen in the Russian-bom painter Marc Chagall. His quest in his work is also a "mj-sterious and lonely poetiy'" and "the ghostly aspect of things that only rare individuals may see." But Cha- gall's rich symbolism is rooted in the piety of Eastern Je^vish Hassidism and in a ^varm feel- ing for life. He was faced with neither the prob- lem of the void nor the death of God. He \\T0te : "Eveiything may change in our demor- alized irorld except the heart, man's love, and his striving to knots' the divine. Painting, like all poetry, has its part in the di\Tne; people feel this today just as much as they used to." The British author Sir Herbert Read once \NTOte of Chagall that he never quite crossed the threshold into the unconscious, but "has al\s'a)'s kept one foot on the earth that had nourished him." This is exactly the "right" re- lation to the unconscious. It is all the more im- portant that, as Read emphasizes, "Chagall has remained one of the most influential artists of oiu time." ^Vith the contrast bebveen Chagall and Chi- rico, a question arises that is important for the understanding of symbolism in modem art: Ho%v does the relationship bebveen conscious- ness and the imconsdous take shape in the work of modem artists? Or, to put it another way, where does man stand? One ansiver may be found in the movement called surrealism, of which the French poet Andre Breton is regarded as the founder. (Chi- rico too may be described as a surrealist.) As a student of medidne, Breton had been intro- duced to the work of Freud. Thus dreams came to play an important part in his ideas. "Can dreams not be used to solve the fundamental problems of life?" he wrote. "I believe that the apparent antagonism bebveen dream and re- ality will be resolved in a kind of absolute reality -- ^in surreality." Breton grasped the point admirably. What he sought rvas a reconciliation of the opposites, consciousness and the unconscious. But theway he took to reach his goal could only lead him astray. He began to experiment %rith Freud's method of free association as well as \vith auto- matic ^vriting, in ^vhich the words and phrases arising from the unconscious are set dotvn with- out any conscious control. Breton called it: "thought's dictation, independent of any aes- thetic or moral preoccupation." But that process simply means that the way is opened to the stream of unconscious images, and the important or even decisive part to be played by consciousness is ignored. As Dr. Jung has shown in his chapter, it is consciousness that holds the key to the values of the uncon- scious, and that therefore plays the decisive part. Consciousness alone is competent to de- termine the meaning of the images and to recognize their significance for man here and now, in the concrete reality of the present. Only in an interplay of consciousness and the uncon- scious can the unconscious prove its value, and perhaps e\'en show a tvay to overcome the mel- ancholy of the void. If the unconscious, once in action, is left to itself, there is a risk that its con- tents tvill become overpowering or tvill mani- fest their negative, destructive side. If ^ve look at surrealist pictures (Uke Salvador Dali's The Burning Giraffe) -with this in mind. we may feel the wealth of their fantasy and the overwhelming power of their unconscious imagery, but we realize the horror and the sym- bolism of the end of all things that speais from many of them. The unconscious is pure nature, and, like nature, pours out its gifts in profusion. But left to itself and without the human re- sponse from consciousness, it can (again like nature) destroy its own gifts and sooner or later sweep them into annihilation. The question of the role of consciousness in modem paintiiig also arkes ia coaueotioa vdth the use of chance as a means of composing paintings. In Beyond Painting Max Ernst wrote: "The association of a sewing machine and an umbrella on a surgical table [he is quoting from the poet Lautreamont] is a fami- liar example, which has now become classical, of the phenomenon discovered by the surreal- ists, that the association of two (or more) apparently alien elements on a plane alien to both is the most potent ignition of poetry." That is probably as difficult for the layman to comprehend as the comment Breton made to the same effect : "Theman who cannot visu- alize a horse galloping on a tomato is an idiot." One ofthe best-known ofmodern "surrealist" painters is Salvador Dali (born 1 904). Above, his famous painting TheBurning Giraffe. Below, one of Max Ernst's frottages (usuallyrubbingstaken from scratches on tiles), from hisNaturalHistory. Ernst'sNaturalHistoryresembles the interesttaken in the past in "accidental" patterns in nature. Below, an engraving ofan 18th- century Dutch museum exhibitthat is also a kind of surrealist "natural history"with its inclusion ofcoral, stones,and skeletons. (We might recall here the "chance" association of a marble head and red rubber gloves in Chi- rico's picture.) Of course, many of these asso- ciations \vere intended as jokes and nonsense. But most modem artists have been concerned with something radically different from jokes. Chance plays a significant part in the work of the French sculptor Jean (or Hans) Arp. His tvoodcuts of leaves and other forms, throtvn to- gether at random, were another expressionofthe quest for, as he put it, "a secret, primal meaning slumbering beneath the \vorld of appearances." He called them Leaves arranged according to the laws of chance and Squares arranged ac- cording to the laws of chance. In these com- positions it is chance that gives depth to the work of art ; it points to an unknown but active principle of order and meaning that becomes manifest in things as their "secret soul." It \vas above all the desire to "make chance essential" (in Paul Klee's words) that underlay the surrealists' efforts to take the grain of wood, cloud formations, and so on as a starting point for their visionary painting. Max Ernst, for instance, ^vent back to Leonardo da Vinci, who t\Tote an essay on Botticelli's remark that if you throw a paint-soaked sponge at a wall, in the splashes itmakesyou ^vill see heads, animals, landscapes, and a host of other configurations. Ernst has described how a vision pursued him in 1925. It forced itself on him as he ^vas staring at a tiled floor marked by thousands of scratches. "In order to give foundation to my powers of meditation and hallucination, I made a series of drawongs of the tiles by laying sheets of paper on them at random and then taking graphite mbbings. When I fixedmy eyes on the result, I was astoundedby a suddenly sharpened sense of a hallucinatory series of contrasting and superposed pictures. I made a collection of the first results obtained from these 'frottages' and called it Histoire Naturelle." It is important to note that Ernst placed over or behind some of these frottages a ring or circle, which gives the picture a peculiar atmo- sphere and depth. Here the psychologist can recognize the unconscious drive to oppose the chaotic hazards of the image's natural language by the symbol of a self-contained psychic whole, thus establishing equilibrium. The ring or circle dominates the pictme. Psychic wholeness rules nature, itself meaningful and giving meaning. Right. Roman coins used in places progressively farther away from Rome. On the last coin (farthest from the controlling center) the face has dis- integrated. This strangely corresponds to the psychic disintegration that such drugs as LSD-25 can induce. Below, drawings done by an artist who took this drug in a test held in Germany in 1951. The drawings grow more abstract as conscious control is overcome by the unconscious. •^59 In Max Ernst's efforts to pursue the secret pattern in things, we may detect an affinity with the 19th-century Romantics. They spoke of nature's "handwriting," which can be seen everywhere, on wings, eggshells, in clouds, snow, ice, crystals, and other "strange conjunc- tions of chance" just as much as in dreams or visions. They saw everything as the expression of one and the same "pictorial language of nature." Thus it was a genuinely romantic ges- ture when Max Ernst called the pictures pro- duced by his experiments "natural history." And he was right, for the unconscious (which had conjured up the pictures in the chance configuration of things) is nature. It is with Ernst's Natural History or Arp's compositions of chance that the reflections of the psychologist begin. He is faced with the question of what meaning a chance arrange- ment -- wherever and whenever it comes about -- can have for the man who happens on it. With this question, man and consciousness come into the matter, and with them the possi- bility of meaning. The chance-created picture may be beautiful or ugly, harmonious or discordant, rich or poor in content, well- or ill-painted. These factors determine its artistic value, but they cannot satisfy the psychologist (often to the distress of the artist or of anyone who finds supreme satis- faction in the contemplation of form). The psy- chologist seeks further and tries to understand the "secret code" of chance arrangement -- ^in so far as man can decipher it at cill. The num- ber and form of the objects thrown together at random by Arp raise as many questions as any detail of Ernst's fantastic frottages. For the psy- chologist, they are symbols ; and therefore they can not only be felt but (up to a certain point) can also be interpreted. The apparent or actual retreat of man from manymodem works of art, thelack of reflection, and the predominance of the unconscious over consciousness offer critics frequent points of attack. They speak of pathological art or com- pare it with pictures by the insane, for it is characteristic of psychosis that consciousness and the ego-personality are submerged and "drowned" by floods of contents from the un- conscious regions of the psyche. It is true that the comparison is not so odious today as it was even a generation ago. When Dr. Jung first pointed out a connection of this kind in his essay on Picasso (1932), it provoked a storm of indignation. Today, the catalogue of a well-known Zurich art gallery speaks of the "almost schizophrenic obsession" of a famous artist, and the German writer Rudolf Kassner described Georg Trakl as "one of the greatest German poets," continuing : "There was some- thing schizophrenic about him. It can be felt in his work ; there is a touch of schizophrenia in it too. Yes, Trakl is a great poet." It is now realized that a state of schizo- phrenia and the artistic vision are not mutually exclusive. To my mind, the famous experiments with mescalin and similar dmgs have contri- buted to this change of attitude. These dmgs create a condition accompanied by intense visions of colors and forms -- not unlike schizo- phrenia. More than one artist of today has sought inspiration in such a drug. The retreat from reality Franz Marc once said : "The art that is coming give formal expression to our scientific con- viction." This tvas a truly prophetic saying. IVe have traced the influence on artists of Freud's psj'choanalj'sis and of the discover^' (or rediscover)-) ofthe unconscious in the early years of the 20th centiny. Another important point is the connection between modem art and the results of research in nuclear ph)-sics. To put it in simple, nonscientiflc terms, nu- clear ph)'sics has robbed the basic units of matter of their absolute concreteness. It has made matter m)'Sterious. Paradoxically, mass and eneig)', ts-ave and particle, have proved to be interchangeable. The la^\-s of cause and effect have become valid only up to a certain point. It does not matter at aU that these rela- th-ities, discontinuities, and paradoxes hold good only on the margins of our world -- only for the infinitely small (the atom) and the in- finitely great (the cosmos). They have caused a revolutionar)* change in the concept of re- ality, for a new, totally different, and irrational reality has datvned behind the reality of our "natural" world, tvhich is ruled by the la\N-5 of classical ph)-acs. Corresponding relath-ities and paradoxes ^s'ere discovered in the domain of the ps)-che. Here, too, another world dawned on the mar- gin of the %vorld of consciousness, governed by new and hitherto imlmots-n la\s-s that are strangely akin to the Ia\s-s of nuclear ph)-sics. The parallelism betts-een nuclear ph)'sics and the ps)-choIogy of the collecth-e imconscious was often a subject of discussion bettveen Jung and Wolfgang Pauli, the Nobel prize^s-inner in ph)'sics. The space-time continuum of ph)-acs and the collective unconscious can be seen, so to speak, as the outer and inner aspects of one and the same reality behind appearances. (The relationship bettveen ph)-sics and ps)-cholog)- u-ill be discussed by Dr. M.-L. von Franz in her concluding essay.) It is a characteristic of this one \vorld behind the worlds of ph)-sics and the p)S)-che that its laws, processes, and contents are unimaginable. That is a fact of outstanding importance for the understanding of the art of our time. For the main subject of modem art is, in a certain sense, unimaginable too. Therefore much mod- em art has become "abstract." The great artists of this centuiy- have sought to give \'isible form to the "life behind things" and so their ^\•orks are a S)mbolic expression of a world behind The paintings on these pages, all by Franz Marc (1880-1916), show his gradual development away from a concern with outward things, tov/ard a more completely "abstract" art. Far left. Blue Horses (1911); center. Roes in a Wood (1913-14) ; below. Play ofForms (1914). Paintinp No.1, 1926. Collection, The Museum ofModern An, New York consciousness (or, indeed, behind dreams, for dreams are only rarely non-figurative). Thus they point to the "one" reality, the "one" life, which seems to be the common background of the ttvo domains of physical and psychic appearances. Only a few artists realized the connection be- tween their form of expression and physics psychology. Kandinsky is one of themasters tvho expressed the deep emotion he felt at the e^rfy discoveries of modem physical research. "In my mind, the collapse of the atom was the collapse of the whole world ; Suddenly the stoutest walls fell. Everything turned unstable, insecure, and soft. I would not have been Sur- prised if a stone had melted into thin air before my eyes. Science seemed to have been annihi- lated." What resulted from this disillusion \vas the artist's withdrawal from the "realm of nature," from the "populous foreground of things." "It seemed," Kandinsky added, "as if I saw art steadily disengaging itself ftom nature." This separation from the world of things happened more or less at the same time to other artists, too. Franz Marc wrote: "Have we not learned from a thousand years of ex- perience that things cease to speak the nmre we hold up to them the visual mirror of their appearance? Appearance is eternally flat . . , For Marc, the goal of art was "to reveal un- earthly life dwelling behind everything, to break the mirror of life so that we may look being in the face." Paul Klee wrote: "The artist does not ascribe to the natural fomt of Left, Piet Mondrian's f'e/ntZ/jp No. 1 -- an example ofthe modern approach to "pureform" (Mondrian's term) through the use ofwholly abstract, geometrical shapes. The artof Paul Klee is a visual exploration and expression ofthe spirit inand behind nature -- the unconscious or, as hetermed it,the "secretly perceived." Sometimes hisvision can be disturbing and demonic, as in hisDeathandFire, right ; or itcan beamore poetic kind offantasy, asin UisSinbad TheSailor (far right) . appearance the same convincing significance as the realists who are his critics. He does not feel so intimately bound to that reality, because he cannot see in the formal products of nature the essence of the creative process. He is more con- cerned with formative powers than wth formal products." Piet Mondrian accused cubism of not having pursued abstraction to its logical end, "the expression of pure reality." That can only be attained by the "creation of pure form," unconditioned by subjective feelings and ideas. "Behind changing natural forms there lies changeless pure reality." A great munber of artists were seeking to get past appearances into the "reality" of the background or the "spirit in matter" by a trans- mutation of things -- through fantasy, surrealism, dream pictures, the use of chance, etc. The "abstract" artists, however, turned their backs on things. Their paintings contained no identi- fiable concrete objects; they were, in Mon- drian's words, simply "pure form." But it must be realized that what these artists were concerned with was something far greater than a problem of form and the distinction betiveen "concrete" and "abstract," figurative and non-figurative. Their goal was the center of life and things, their changeless background, and an inward certitude. Art had become mysticism. The spirit in whose mystery art was sub- merged was an earthly spirit, which the medi- eval alchemists had called Mercurius. He is a symbol of the spirit that these artists divined or sought behind nature and things, "behind the appearance of nature." Their mysticism was alien to Christianity, for that "Mercurial" spirit is alien to a "heavenly" spirit. Indeed, it ^vas Christianity's dark adversary that was forg- ing its way in art. Here we begin to see the real historical and symbolic significance of "modem art." Like the hermetic movements in the Middle Ages, it must be understood as a mysticism of the spirit of earth, and therefore as an expression of our time compensatory to Christianity. No artist sensed this mystic backgroimd of art more clearly or spoke of it %vith greater passion than Kandinsky. The importance of the great works of art of all time did not lie, in his eyes, "on the surface, in externals, but in the root of all roots -- in the mystical content of art." Therefore he says : "The artist's eye should al^vays be turned in upon his inner life, and his ear should be alwaj's alert for the voice of inward necessity. This is the only way of giving expression to what the mystic vision commands." Kandinsky called his pictures a spiritual ex- pression of the cosmos, a music of the spheres, a harmony of colors and forms. "Form, even if it is quite abstract and geometrical, has an inrvard clang ; it is a spiritual being rvith effects that coincide absolutely wth that form." "The impact of the acute angle of a triangle on a circle is actually as overwhelming in effect as the finger of God touching the finger of Adam in Michelangelo." In 1914, Franz Marc wrote in his Aphor- isms : "Matter is a thing that man can at best tolerate ; he refuses to recognize it. The contem- plation of the world has become the penetration of the rvorld. There is no mystic who, in his moments of sublimest rapture, ever attained the perfect abstraction of modem thought, or took his soundings %sdth a deeper plummet." Paul Klee, ^\'ho may be regarded as the poet amongmodem painters, says : "It is the artist's mission to penetrate as far as may be toward that secret groimd where primal law feeds growth. Which artist ^vould not ^vish to dwell at the central organ of aU motion in space-time (be it the brain or the heart of creation) from which all functions derive their life? In the womb of natme, in the primal groimd of crea- tion, where the secret key to all things lies hidden?. . . Our beating heart drives us down- ward, far doivn to the primal ground." What is encountered on this journey "must be taken most seriously when it is perfectly fused with the appropriate artistic means in visible form," because, as Klee adds, it is not a question of merely reproducing ivhat is seen ; "the secretly perceived is made visible." Edee'swork is rooted in that primal ground. "My hand is entirely the instrument of a more distant sphere. Nor is it my head that functions in my ivork ; it is some- thing else . ..." In his ivork the spirit of na- ture and the spirit of the unconscious became inseparable. They have drawn him and draiv us, the onlookers, into their magic circle. Klee's work is the most complex expression -- now poetic, now demonic -- of the chthonic spirit. Humor and bizarre ideas build a bridge from the realm of the dark underworld to the human world; the bond between his fantasy and the earth is the careful observation of the laws of nature and the love for all creatures. "For the artist," he once ^vrote, "the dialogue with nature is the conditio sine qua non of his ^vork." A different expression of the hidden uncon- sciom spirit can be foimd in one of the most notable of the younger "abstract" painters, Jackson Pollock, the American who was killed in a car accident when he was 44. His work has had a great influence on the younger artists of our time. In My Painting, he revealed that he painted in a kind of trance: "When I am in my painting I am not aware of what I am doing. It is only after a sort of 'get acquainted' period that I see what I have been about. I have no fears about making changes, destroy- ing the image, etc., because the painting has a life of its own. I try to let it come through. It is only when I lose contact with the painting that the result is a mess. Otherwise there is pure harmony, an easy give and take, and the painting comes out well." Pollock's pictures, which were painted prac- tically xmconsciously, are charged with bound- less emotional vehemence. In their lack of structure they are almost chaotic, a glowing lava stream of colors, lines, planes, and points. They may be regarded as a parallel to what the alchemists called the massa confusa, the prima materia, or chaos -- all ways of defining the precious prime matter of the alchemical pro- cess, the starting point of the quest for the essence of being. Pollock's pictures represent the nothing that is everything -- that is, the un- conscious itself. They seem to live in a tune before the emergence of consciousness and be- ing, or to be fantastic landscapes of a time after the extinction of consciousness and being. In the middle of our century, the purely ab- stract picture without any regular order of forms and colors has become the most frequent expression in painting. The deeper the dissolu- tion of "reality," the more the picture loses its symbolic content. The reason for this lies in the nature of the symbol and its function. The sym- bol is an object of the known world hinting at something unkno^vn ; it is the known expressing the life and sense of the inexpressible. But in merely abstract paintings, the world of the kno^vn has completely vanished. Nothing is left to form a bridge to the unknown. On the other hand, these paintings reveal an imexpected background, a bidden sense. They often turn out to be more or less exact images of nature itself, showing an astounding simi- larity tvith the molecular structure of organic and inorganic elements of nature. This is a per- plexing fact. Pure abstraction has become an image of concrete nature. But Jung may give us the key to understanding : "The deeper layers of the psyche," he has said, "lose their individual uniqueness as they retreat farther and farther into darkness. 'Lower down,' that is to say, as they approach the auto- nomous functional systems, they become in- creasingly collective until they are universalized and extinguished in the body's materiality, i.e. in chemical substances. The body's carbon is simply carbon. Hence 'at bottom' the psyche is simply 'rvorld.' " A comparison of abstract paintings and microphotographs show that utter abstraction of imaginative art has in a secret and surpris- ing way become "naturalistic," its subject be- ing elements of matter. The "great abstraction" and the "great realism," which parted at the beginning of our century, have come together again. We remember Kandinsky's words: "The poles open two paths, -^vhich both lead to one goal at the end." This "goal," the point of union, is reached in modem abstract paintings. But it is attained completely imconsciously. The artist's intention plan's no part in the process. This point leads to a most important fact about modem art : The artist is, as it were, not so free in his creative work as he may think he is. If his work is performed in a more or less unconscious way, it is controlled by laws of nature that, on the deepest level, correspond to the la^vs of the psyche, and vice versa. The great pioneers of modem art gave clear- est expression to its tme aims and to the depths from which the spirit rose that left its imprint on them. This point is important, though later artists, who may have failed to realize it, did not al\s'ays plumb the same depths. Yet neither Kandinsky, nor Klee, nor any other of the early masters of modem painting, was ever aware of the grave psychological danger he was under- going with the mystical submersion in the chthonic spirit and the primal ground of nature. That danger must now be explained. As a starting point we may take another aspect of abstract art. The German writer Wil- helm Worringer interpreted abstract art as the expression of a metaphysical unease and anx- iety that seemed to him to be more pronounced among northern peoples. As he explained, they suffer from reality. The natiualness of the southern peoples is denied to them and they long for a super-real and supersensual world to which they give expression in imaginative or abstract art. But, as Sir Herbert Read remarks in his Concise History of Modern Art, metaphysical anxiety is no longer only Germanic and north- ern ; it now characterizes the whole of the mod- em world. Read quotes Klee, who wrote in his Diary at the beginning of 1915 : "The more horrifying this world becomes (as it is in these da^-s) the more art becomes abstract; while a world at peace produces realistic art." To Franz Marc, abstraction offered a refuge from the evil and ugliness in this \vorld. "Very early in life I felt that man was ugly. The animals seemed to be more lovely and pure, yet even among them I discovered so much that was re- volting and hideous that my painting became more and more schematic and abstract." A good deal may be learned from a conver- sation that took place in 1958 between the Italian sculptor Marino Marini and the writer Edouard Roditi. The dominant subject that Marini treated for years in many variations is the nude figure of a youth on a horse. In the early versions, which he described in the con- versation as "symbols of hope and gratitude" (after the end of the Second World War), the rider sits his horse ^vith outstretched arms, his Thepaintings ofJackson Pollock (left, hisNo.23) were painted in a trance (unconsciously) as arethe worksofothermodem artists -- such asthe French "action" painter Georges Mathieu (far left).The chaotic but powerful resultmaybecompared to themassa confusa ofalchemy,and strangely resembles the hitherto hiddenformsof matterasrevealed inmicrophotographs (see p.22). Righta similarconfiguration : a vibration patternmade bysound waves in glycerine. body bending slighdy back^vard. In the cotirse of years the treatment of the subject became more "abstract." The more or less "classical" form of the rider gradually dissolved. Speaking of the feeling undeiljung this change, ilarini said : "If you look at my equestrian statues of the last 12 years in order of time, you ^vill notice that the animal's panic steadily increases, but that it is frozen TOth terror and stands paralj-zed rather than rear- ing or taking flight. That is all because I be- lieve that sve are approaching the end of the svorld. In e\-eiy' figure, I strove to express a deepening fear and despair. In this -^vay I am attempting to sjmbolize the last stage of a d)ing mjth, the m}'th of the indi\idual, vic- torious hero, of the humanist's man of virtue." In fairy- tale and mj-th, the "\ictoiious hero" is a s%mbol of consciousness. His defeat, as Jvlarini says himself, means the death of the indhidual, a phenomenon that appears in a sodal context as the submergence of the indi- \idual in the mass, and in art as the decline of the human element ISTien Roditi asked ^s'hether Marini's stjie tvas abandoning the clasacal canon on its ^s•ay to becoming "abstract," Marini replied, "As soon as art has to express fear, it must of itself depart from the classical ideal." He formd subjects for his work in the bodies exca\-ated at PompeiL Roditi called Marini's art a "Hiro- shima stjle," for it conjures up \isions of the end of a -svorld. Marini admitted it He fdt, he said, as if he had been expelled from an earthly paradise. "Until recently, the sculptor aimed at full sensual and po^verful forms. But for the last 15 years, sculpture prefers forms in disint^ration." The conversation behveen Marini and Roditi explains the transformation of "sensory-" art into abstraction that should be clear to anyone is'ho has ever ^\alked open-eyed through an exhibi- tion of modem art Horvever much he may appreciate or admire its formal qualities, he can scarcely fail to sense the fear, despair, ag- gression, and mockery- that sounds like a cry from many %vorks. The "metaphysical amdety" that is expressed by the distress in these pictures and sculptures may have arisen from the des- pair of a doomed world, as it did \sith Marini. In other cases, the emphasis may lie on the religious factor, on the feeling that God is dead. There is a close connection between the trvo. At the root of this iimer distress lies the de- feat (or rather the retreat) of consciousness. In the upsurge of mj-stical experience, everything that once bound man to the human world, to earth, to time and space, to matter and the natural li\Tng of life, has been cast aside or dissolved. But unless the unconscious is bal- anced by tlie experience of consciousness, it will implacably reveal its contrary' or negative aspect. Tlie wealth of creative sound that made the harmony of the spheres, or the wonderful mysteries of the primal ground, have yielded to destruction and despair. In more than one case the artist has become the passive victim of the unconscious. In physics, too, the rvorld of tlie background has revealed its paradoxical nature; the laws of the inmost elements of nature, the newly discovered structures and relations in its basic unit, the atom, have become the scientific foun- dation for unprecedented weapons of destruc- tion, and opened the way to annihilation. Ultimate knowledge and the destruction of the world are the two aspects of the discovery of the primal ground of nature. Jung, who was as familiar tilth the danger- ous dual nature of the unconscious as tilth the Top leftand center,two sculptures byMarino Marini (born 1901),from 1945and1951 respectively,show howthethemeof horseand rider was alteredfroman expression of tranquilitytoone oftortured fear and despair,whilethe sculptures themselvesgrewcorrespondingly more and more abstract. Marini's later workwasinfluenced bytheequally panic-strickenshapes of bodies found at Pompeii (left). importance of human consciousness, could ofler mankind only one weapon against catas- trophe; the call for individual consciousness, which seems so simple and yet is so arduous. Consciousness is not only indispensable as a counterpoise to the unconscious, and not only gives the possibility of meaning to life. It has also an eminently practical function. The ei'il ii'itnessed in the world outside, in neighbors or neighboring peoples, can be made conscious as evil contents of our own psyche as well, and this insight would be the first step to a radical change in our attitude to our neighbors. Eni'y, lust, sensuality', lies, and all known wees are the negative, "dark" aspect of the un- conscious, which can manifest itself in t^vo ways. In the positive sense, it appears as a "spirit of nature," creatively animating man, things, and the world. It is the "chthonic spirit" that has been mentioned so often in this chapter. In the negative sense, the unconscious (that same spirit) manifests itself as a spirit of evil, as a drive to destroy. As has already been pointed out, the alche- mists personified this spirit as "the spirit Mercu- rius" and called it, ivith good reason, Mercurius duplex (the two-faced, dual Mercurius). In the religious language of Christianity, it is called the devil. But, however improbable it may seem, the devil too has a dual aspect. In the positive sense, he appears as Lucifer -- ^literally, the light-bringer. Looked at in the light of these difficult and paradoxical ideas, modem art (which we have recognized as symbolic of the chthonic spirit) also has a dual aspect. In the positive sense it is the e.xprcssion of a mysteriously profound nature-mysticism; in the negative, it can only be interpreted as the expression of an evil or destructive spirit. The tivo sides belong to- gether, for the paradox is one of the basic qualities of the unconscious and its contents. To prevent any misunderstanding, it must once more be emphasized that these considera- tions have nothing to do with artistic and aesthetic values, but are solely concerned with the interpretation ofmodem art as a sy'mbol of our time. Union of opposites There is one more point to be made. The spirit of the age is in constant movement. It is like a river that flows on, invisibly but surely, and given themomentum of life in our century, even 10 years is a long time. About the middle of this century a change began to come over painting. It was nothing revolutionary, nothing like the change that happened about 1910, which meant the recon- struction of art to its very foundations. But there were groups of artists who formulated their aims in ways not heard before. This trans- formation is going on within the frontiers of abstract painting. The representation of concrete reality, which springs from the primal human need of catch- ing the passing moment on the wing, has be- come a truly concrete sensuous art in the photo- graphy of such men as France's Henri Cartier- Bresson, Switzerland's Werner Bischof, and others. We can therefore understand why artists continued on their own way of inwardness and imagination. For a good many of the young artists, however, abstract art as it had been practiced for many years offered no adventure, no field of conquest. Seeking the new, they found it in what lay nearest, yet had been lost -- in nature and man. They were and are not concerned with the reproduction of nature in pictures, but with the expression of their own emotional experience of nature. The French painter Alfred Manessier defined the aims of his art in these words : "What we have to reconquer is the weight of lost reality. We must make for ourselves a new heart, a new spirit, a new soul, in the measure of man. The painter's true reality lies neither in abstraction nor in realism, but in the reconquest of his weight as a human being. At present non-fig- urative art seems to me to offer the one oppor- tunity for the painter to approach the inward reality of himself and to grasp the consciousness of his essential self, or even of his being. It is only by the reconquest of his position, I believe, that the painter will be able, in the time to come, to return slowly to himself, to rediscover his own weight and so to strengthen it that it can even reach the outward reality of the world." Jean Bazaine speaks in similar terms : "It is a great temptation for the painter of today to paint the pure rhythm of his feeling, the most secret pulse of his heart, instead of embodying it in a concrete form. That, however, leads only to a desiccated mathematics or a kind of ab- stract expressionism, which ends in monotony and a progressive impoverishment of form. . . . But a form that can reconcile man with his world is an 'art of communion' by which man, at any moment, can recognize hb own un- formed countenance in the world." What in fact artists now have at heart is a conscious reunion of their own inward reality with the reality of the world or of nature; or, in the last resort, a new union of body and soul, matter and spirit. That is their way to the "re- conquest of their weight as human beings." Only now is the great rift that set in with modem art (between "great abstraction" and "great realism") being made conscious and on the way to being healed. For the onlooker, this first becomes evident in the changed atmosphere in the works of these artists. There radiates from the pictures of such artists as Alfred Manessier or the Belgian-bom painter Gustave Singier, in spite of all abstrac- tion, a belief in the world, and, in spite of all intensity of feeling, a harmony of forms and colors that often attains serenity. In the French painter Jean Lurgat's famous tapestries of the In this centurythe depiction of actuality -- once the province of the painterand sculptor -- hasbeen taken overbythe photographer, whosecamera can notonlyrecord but (likeany landscape painting of pastcenturies) can expressthe photographer'sown emotional experience ofthesubject. Right.a Japanesescene photographed byWerner Bischof (1 91 6-64). 1950s the exuberance of nature pervades the picture. His art could be called sensuous as weU as imaginative. We find a serene harmony of forms and col- ors also in the work of Paul Klee. This har- mony was what he had always been striving for. Above all, he had realized the necessity of not denying evil. "Even evil must not be a triumphant or degrading enemy, but a power collaborating in the whole." But Klee's starting point was not the same. He lived near "the dead and the unborn" at an almost cosmic dis- tance from this world, while the younger gen- eration of painters can be said to be more firmly rooted in earth. An important point to notice is that modem painting, just when it has advanced far enough to discern the union of the opposites, has taken up religious themes. The "metaphysical void" seems to have been overcome. And the utterly unexpected has happened : The Church has be- come patron of modem art. We need only mention here All Saints at Basle, with windows by Alfred Manessier; Assy church, with pic- tures by a large number of modem artists ; the Matisse chapel at Vence; and the church at Audincourt, which has works by Jean Bazaine and the French artist Fernand Leger. The admission of modem art to the Church means more than an act of broadmindedness on the part of its patrons. It is symbolic of the fact that the part played by modem art in re- lation to Christianity is changing. The compen- satory function of the old hermetic movements has made way for the possibility of collabora- tion. In discussing the animal symbols of Christ, it was pointed out that the light and the chtho- nic spirits belonged to each other. It seems as if the moment had come today when a new stage in the solution of this millennial problem might be reached. What the future will yield we cannot know -- whether the bridging of the opposites will give positive results, or whether the way will lead through yet more unimaginable catastrophes. There is too much anxiety and too much dread at work in the world, and this is still the pre- dominant factor in art and society. Above all, there, is still too much unwillingness on the part of the individual to apply to himself and his life the conclusions that can be drawn from art, although he might be ready to accept them in art. The artist can often express many things, unconsciously and without awakening hostility, which are resentedwhen they are expressedby a psychologist (a fact that could be demonstrated even more conclusively in literature than in the visual arts). Confronted by the statements of the psychologist, the individual feels directly chal- lenged ; but what the artist has to say, particu- larly in our century, usually remains in an impersonal sphere. And yet it seems important that the sug- gestion of a more svhole, and therefore more human, form of expression should have be- come \'isible in our time. It is a glimmer of hope, symbolized for me (at the time of WTit- ing: 1961) by a number of paintings by the French artist Pierre Soulages. Behind a cataract of huge, black rafters there glimmers a clear, pure blue or a radiant yellow. Light is daism- ing behind darkness. m i 't '4 ii w / Mid-20th century art seems to be moving away from a Marini-like despair -- as is seen in the gesture of Jean Lurcat, who exhibited his work in a field (top left), a link with nature and the earth. Above, DSdicace i Sainte Marie Madeleine by Alfred Manessier (born 1911). Top right. Pour la Naissance du Surhomme by France's Pierre-Yves Tr^mois (bom 1921). Both works indicate a tendency toward life and wholeness. The painting, right, by Pierre Soulages (born 1919) might be understood as a symbol of hope Behind the cataclysmic darkness can be seen a glimmer of light. t 5 Symbols in an individual analysis Jolande Jacobi A 1 7th-century French drawing of'The Palace of Dreams' Symbols in an individual analysis The beginning of the analysis There is a widespread belief that the methods of Jungian psychology are applicable only to middle-aged people. True, many men and \vomen reach middle age without achieving psychological maturity, and it is therefore necessary to help them through the neglected phases of their development. They have not completed the first part of the process of indi- viduation that Dr. M.-L. von Franz has des- cribed. But it is also true that a young person can encounter serious problems as he grows up. If a young person is afraid of life and finds it hard to adjust to reality, he might prefer to dwell in his fantasies or to remain a child. In such a young person (especially if he is intro- verted) one can sometimes discover unexpected treasures in the unconscious, and by bringing them into consciousness strengthen his ego and give him the psychic energy he needs to grow into a mature person. That is the function of the powerful symbolism of our dreams. Other contributors to this book have des- cribed the nature of these symbols and the role they play in man's psychological nature. I wish to show how analysis can aid the individuation process by taking the example of a young en- gineer, aged 25, whom I shall call Henry. Henry came from a rural district in eastern Switzerland. His father, of Protestant peasant stock, was a general practitioner: Henry des- cribed him as aman with high moral standards, but a rather withdrawn person who found it difficult to relate to other people. He was more of a father to his patients than to his children. At home, Henry's mother was the dominant personality. "We were raised by the strong hand of our mother," he said on one occasion. She came from a family with an academic background and wide artistic interests. She her- self, in spite of her strictness, had a broad spiri- tual horizon ; she was impulsive and romantic (she had a great love for Italy). Though she was by birth a Catholic, her children had been brought up in the Protestantism of their father. Henry had a sister, older than himself, with whom he had a good relationship. Henry was introverted, shy, finely drawn, and very tall, with light hair, a high pale fore- head, and blue eyes with dark shadows. He did not think that a neurosis (the most usual reason) had brought him to me, but rather an inner urge to work on his psyche. A strong mother- tie, however, and a fear of committing himself to life were hidden behind this urge ; but these were only discovered during the analytical work with me. He had just completed his studies and taken a position in a large factory, and he was facing the many problems of a young man on the threshold of manhood. "It appears to me," he wrote in a letter asking for an interview, "that this phase of my life is particularly im- portant and meaningful. I must decide either to remain unconscious in a well-protected secu- rity, or else to venture on a yet unknown way of which I have great hopes." The choice thus confronting him was whether to remain a lonely, vacillating, and unrealistic youth or to become a self-sufficient and responsible adult. Henry told me that he preferred books to society; he felt inhibited among people, and was often tormented by doubts and self-criti- cism. He was well read for his age and had a leaning toward aesthetic intellectualism. After an earlier atheistic stage, he became rigorously Protestant, but finally his religious attitude became completely neutral. He had chosen a technical education because he felt his talents lay in mathematics and geometry. He possessed a logical mind, trained in the natural sciences, but he also had a propensity toward the irra- tional and mystical that he did not want to admit even to himself. About two years before his analysis began, Henry had become engaged to a Catholic girl from the French part of Switzerland. He des- cribed her as charming, efficient, and full of initiative. Nevertheless, he -ivas uncertain whether he should undertake the responsibility of marriage. Since he had so little acquaintance \s'ith girls, he thought it might be better to -wait, or even to remain a bachelor dedicated to a scholarly life. His doubts \vere strong enough to prevent his reaching a decision; he needed a further step to^vard maturity before he could feel sure of himself. Although qualities of both his parents ^vere combined in Henry, he ^vas markedly mother- bound. In his consciousness, he was identified ^s'ith his real (or "light") mother, who repre- sented high ideals and intellectual ambitions. But in his unconscious he %vas deeply in the power of the dark aspects of his mother-bound condition. His unconscious stiU held his ego in a strangle-hold. All his clear-cut thinking and his efforts to find a firm standpoint in the purely rational remained nothing more than an intellectual exercise. The need to escape from this "mother- prison" ^vas expressed in hostile reactions to his real mother and a rejection of the "mner mother" as a symbol of the feminine side of the unconscious. But an inner po^ver sought to hold him back in the condition of childhood, resisting everjlhing that attracted him to the outside -world. Even the attractions of his fiancee were not enough to free him from his mother-ties, and thus help him find himself. He was not aware that his iimer urge for growth (which he felt strongly) included the need to detach himself from his mother. My anal)'tical work rvith Henry lasted nine months. Altogether, there ^v•ere 35 sessions in which he presented 50 dreams. So short an analj-sis is rare. It is only possible when energ\'- laden dreams like Henr)''s speed up the process of development. Of course, from the Jungian point of ^ew, there is no rule for the length of time required for a successful analysis. All de- pends on the indiHdual's readiness to realize irmer facts and on the material presented by his unconscious. Like most introverts, Henrj' led a rather monotonous outer fife. During the day he ^vas completely involved in his job. In the evem'ngs he sometimes went out with his fiancee or with friends, ^rith ^vhom he liked to have literary' discussions. Quite often he sat in his lodgings absorbed in a book or in his o\s'n thoughts. Though we regularly discussed the happenings of his daily life, and also his childhood and youth, we usually got fairly quickly to the in- vestigation of his dreams and the problems his inner life presented to him. It was extraordi- nar\' to see how strongly his dreams emphasized his "call" to spiritual development. But I must make it clear that not eveiything described here -^vas told to Henr)'. In analjsis one must always remain conscious of ho^v ex- Left,the palaceand monastery of Escorial, Spain, builtby Philip II about 1563. Itsfortress structure imagesthe introvert'sv/ithdrawal fromthe world. Below, adrawing by Henryof abam he builtasa child with fortress-like battlements. plosive the dreamer's dream symbols may be for him. The analyst can hardly be too careful and reserved. If too bright a light is thrown on the dream-language of symbols, the dreamer can be driven into anxiety, and thus led into rationalization as a defense mechanism. Or he can no longer assimilate them, and can fall into a severe psychic crisis. Also, the dreams re- ported and commented on here are by no means all the dreams that Henry had during his analysis. I can discuss only an important few that influenced his development. In the beginning of our work, childhood memories with important symbolic meanings came up. The oldest dated back to Henry's fourth year. He said : "One morning I was allowed to go with my mother to the baker's shop and there. I received a crescent roll from the baker's wife. I did not eat the roll but carried it proudly inmy hand. Onlymy mother and the baker's wife were present, so I was the only man." Such crescents are popularly called "moon-teeth," and this symbolic allusion to the moon underlines the dominating power of the feminine -- a power to which the little boy may have felt exposed and which, as the "only man," he was proud of being able to confront. Another childhood memory came from his fifth year. It concerned Henry's sister, who came home after her examinations at school and found him constructing a toy bam. The bam was made with blocks of wood arranged in the form of a square and surrounded with a kind of hedge that looked like the battle- ments of a castle. Henry was pleased with his achievement, and said teasingly to his sister: "You have started school but you're already on holiday." Her reply, that he was on holiday all year, upset him terribly. He felt deeply hurt that his "achievement" was not taken seriously. Even years later Henry had not forgotten the bitter hurt and injustice that he had felt when his constmction was rejected. His later problems concerning the assertion of his mas- culinity and the conflict between rational and fantasy values are already visible in this early experience. And these problems are cJso to be seen in the images of his first dream. The initial dream The day after Henry's first visit to me, he had the follo^sing dream : I -was on an excursion wth a group of people I did not know. We were going to the Zinalrot- hom. We had started from Samaden. AVe only walked about an hour because we were to camp and have some theatricals. I was not given an actix-e part. I especially remember one performer -- a young woman in a pathetic role wearing a long flowing robe. It Ns'cis midday and I wanted to go on to the pass. As all the others preferred to remain, I went up alone, lea\'ing my equipment behind. How'- ever, I fmmd mj'self right back in the valley and completely lost my orientation. I tvanted to re- turn to my part)' but did not know which moun- tainside I should climb. I -was hesitant about ask- ing. Finally, an old woman showed me the way I must go. Then I ascended from a different starting point than our group had used in the morning. It svas a matter of making a turn at the right altitude and then foUow'ing the mountain slope to return to the party. I climbed along a cog- wheel mountain railway on the right side. On my left little cars constantly passed me, each con- taining one hidden bloated little man in a blue suit. It is said they are dead. I was afraid of other cars coming from behind and kept turning around to look, so as not to be run over. My anxiety was needless. At the point where I had to turn off to the right, there were people awaiting me. They took me to an inn. A cloudburst came up. I regretted thatmy equipment -- my rucksack, and my motor bike -- ^vere not there, but I was told not to get them till next morning. I accepted the advice. One of Henry'schildhood memories involved a crescent roll,which he drew (top left). Center,thesame shapeonamodemSwissbakerysign. Thecrescentshape haslongbeen linked withthemoonandthuswith thefeminine principle, as inthe crown (left) ofthegoddess Ishtar ofthird-century B.c. Babylon. Dr. Jung assigned great importance to the first dream in an analysis, for, according to him, it often has anticipatory value. A deci- sion to go into analj'sis is usually accompanied by an emotional upheaval that disturbs the deep psychic levels from which archetypal S)'m- bols arise. The first dreams therefore often present "collective images" that provide a per- spective for the analysis as a whole and can gh'e the therapist insight into the dreamer's ps)'chic conflicts. What does the above dream teU us of Henry's future development? IVe must first examine some of the associations that Henry himself sup- plied. The %'illage of Samaden had been the home of Jiirg Jenatsch, a famous 17th-century Swiss freedom-fighter. The "theatricals" called up the thought of (joethe's Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre, which Henr)' liked very much. In the woman he saw a resemblance to the figure in a painting called The Island of the Dead by the 19th-centmy Stviss artist Arnold Bocklin. The "wise old woman," as he called her, seemed to be associated on the one hand to his analyst, on the other to the charwoman in J. B. Priestley's play They Came to a City. The cog-'ivheel rail\vay reminded him of the bam (w'ith battlements) that he had built as a child. The dream describes an "excursion" (a sort of "w'alldng tour"), ^vhich is a striking parallel to Henrj''s decision to undertake anaij'sis. The indiHduation process is often s)'mbolized by a voyage of discovery to imknown lands. Such a voyage takes place in John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, or in Dante's Divina Commedia. The "traveler" in Dante's poem, searching for a way, comes to a mountain that he decides to climb. But because of three strange animals (a motif that will also appear in one of Heniy''s later dreams) he is forced to descend into the valley and even into hell. (Later he ascends again to purgatory and finally reaches para- dise.) From this parallel one could deduce that The initial stage ofthe process of individuation can sometimes be a period ofdisorientation -- aswasthe casewith Henry. Left,the first woodcutfrom the 1 5th-centurybook TheDream ofPoUphitoshowsthe dreamerfearfullyentering a dark wood -- perhapsrepresenting his entrance into theunknown. Associations produced by Henry to his first dream : right. Island of the Dead by the 1 9th-century Swiss artist Arnold Bocklin. Far right, a scene from the 1944 London production of J. B. Priestley's They Came to a City, which concerns the reactions of a group of people from many walks of life to an "ideal city." One of the central characters is a charwoman, left of picture. there might be a similar period of disorienta- tion and lonely seeking in store for Henry, The first part of this life-journey, represented as climbing a mountain, offers ascent from the unconscious to an elevated point of view of the ego -- i.e., to an increased consciousness. Samaden is named as the starting point of the excursion. This is where Jenatsch (whom we may take as embodying the "freedom-seek- ing" sense within Henry's unconscious) started his campaign for the liberation of the Veltlin region of Switzerland from the French. Jenatsch had other characteristics in common with Henry ; He was a Protestant who fell in love with a Catholic girl; and, like Henry, whose analysis was to free him from his mother- ties and from fear of life, Jenatsch also fought for liberation. One could interpret this as a favorable augury for the success of Henry's own fight for freedom. The goal of the excursion is the Zinalrothom, a mountain in western Swit- zerland that he did not know. The word rot ("red") in Zinalro/hom touches on Heimy's emotional problem. Red is usually symbolic of feeling or passion; here it points to the value of the feeling-function, which was insufficiently developed in Henry. And the word "horn" reminds one of the crescent roll in the baker's shop of Henry's childhood. After a short walk, a halt is called, and Henry can return to a state of passivity. This also belongs to his nature. The point is under- lined by the "theatricals." Attending the theatre (rvhich is an imitation of real life) is a popular way of evading an active part in life's drama. The spectator can identify with the play, yet continue to pander to his fantasies. This kind of identification permitted the Greeks to experi- ence catharsis, much as the psycho-drama initi- ated by the American psychiatrist J. L. Moreno is now used as a therapeutic aid. Some such process may have enabled Henry to undergo an inner development when his associations raised memories of Wilhelm Meisler, Goethe's story of the maturing of a young man. That Henry should have been impressed by the romantic appearance of a woman is also not surprising. This figure resembles Henry's mother and is at the same time a personifica- tion of his own unconscious feminine side. The coimection Henry makes between her and Bocklin's Island of the Dead points to his de- pressive mood, so well expressed by the painting, which shows a white-robed priest-like figure steering a boat bearing a coffin toward an island. We have here a significant double paradox : The keel of the boat seems to sug- gest a contrary course, away from the island; and the "priest" is a figure of uncertain sex. In Henry's associations, this figure is certainly hermaphroditic. The double paradox coincides with Henry's ambivalence : The opposites in his soul are still too undifferentiated to be clearly separated. After this interlude in the dream, Hcnr)' suddenly becomes aware that it is noon and he must go on. So he again starts for the pass. A mountain pass is a well-known sjTnbol for a "situation of transition" that leads from an old attitude of mind to a new one. Henry must go alone; it is essential for his ego to surmount the test unaided. Thus he leaves hb kit behind -- an action that signifies that his mental equip- ment has become a burden, or that he must change his normal way of going about things. But he does not reach the pass. He loses his bearings and finds himself back in the valley. This failure shows that while Henry's ego de- cides on activity, his other psychic entities (re- presented by the other members of the party) remain in the old state of passivity and refuse to accompany the ego. (When the dreamer himself appears in a dream, he usually repre- sents only his conscious ego; the other figures stand for his more or less unknown, uncon- scious qualities.) Henry is in a situation ^vhcrc he is liclpless, yet ashamed to admit it. At this moment he meets an old tvoman who indicates the right way to him. He can do nothing but accept her ad'rice. The helpful "old woman" is a well-known symbol in myths and fairy tales for the wisdom of the eternal female nature. Tlic rationalist Henry hesitates to accept her help because such acceptance requires a sacrificium inteUcctus -- a sacrifice, or discarding, of a rational way of thought. (This demand will often be made of Henry in later dreams.) Such a sacrifice is unavoidable; it applies to his relationship with the analysis as well as with cvery'day life. . . . He assqcijye^,(t''{}jat I Jiave had tliis dream ^ndlMs times. Military service, long-distance race. Alone I go on iny way. I never reach the goal. Will I be the last? Tlie course is wll known to me, all of it deja vu. The start is in a little wood, and the ground is covered with dr>' leaves. The terrain slopes gently to an idyllic little brook that invites one to tarry. Later, tliere is a dusty countr)' road. It leads toward Hombrechtikon, a small village near the upper lake of Zurich. A brook bordered by willows similar to a painting of Bocklin's in which a dreamy female figure follows the course of the water. Night falls. In a village I ask for directions to the road. I am told the road leads on for seven hours over a pass. I gather myself together and go on. However, this time the end of tlie dream differs. After the willow-bordered brook I get into a wood. There I discover a doe that runs away. I am proud of tliis observation. The doe has appeared on the left side and now I turn to the right. Here I see three strange creatures, half pig, half dog, with the legs of a kangaroo. The faces are, quite undifferentiated, with large droop- ing dog ears. Maybe tlicy are costumed people. As a boy, I once masqueraded in the circus cos- tume of a donkey. keeps to the right side of tiie track -- which is the conscious side. (In the history of symbolism, tlic right side generally represents the realm of consciousness; the left, the unconscious.) From the left, little cars arc coming down, and in each a little man is hidden. Henry is afraid that an unnoticed upward-bound car might hit him from the rear. His anxiety proves groundless, but it reveals that Henry is afraid of what, so to speak, lies behind his ego. The bloated, blue-clothed men might sym- bolize sterile intellectual thoughts that arc be- ing brought down mechanically. Blue often denotes the function of thinking. Thus the we may take as embodying tne~ ing" sense within Henry's unconscious) started his campaign for the liberation of the Veltlin procesr region of Switzerland from the French. an ini Jenatsch had other characteristics in common raised with Henry ; He was a Protestant who fell in story c love with a Catholic girl; and, like Henry, Tha whose analysis was to free him from his mother- the roi ties and from fear of life, Jenatsch also fought not su for liberation. One could interpret this as a mother favorable augury for the success of Henry'sown tion of fight for freedom. The goal of the excursion is coimeci the Zinalrothom, a mountain in western Swit- Bocklin zerland that he did not know. The word rot pressive ("red") in Zinalrothom touches on Henry's which emotional problem. Red is usually symbolic of steering feeling or passion; here it points to the value island, of the feeling-function, which was insufficiently parado: developed in Henry. And the word "hom" gest a t reminds one of the crescent roll in the baker's and thr shop of Henry's childhood. In Hen- After a short walk, a halt is called, and hermap Henry can return to a state of passivity. This with H men might be symbols of ideas or attitnH l have died oa the mtellectual height a.r fe too thia. They could ak. less inner parts of Henr/s psyche ^ A comment on these men is'madeb diedream: "It is said they are dead" But is alone. Who makes this statemern? ifiT!voice -- and when a voice is heard in a dream it is a most meaningful occuhence. Dr. Tum identified the appearance of a voice in dreams tvith an intervention of the Self. It stands for a knowledge that has its roots m the collective fundaments of the psyche. What the voice says cannot be disputed. The insight Henry has gained about the "dead" formulas, to which he has been too committed, marks atummgpomt in the dream. He has at last reached the right place for tak- ing a new direction, to the right (the conscious direction), toward the conscious and the outer world. There he finds the people he left behind waiting for him ; and thus he can become con- scious of previously unknown aspects of his per- sonality, Since his ego has surmounted the dangcre it confronted alone (an accomplish- ment that could make him more mature and stable), he can rejoin the group or "collective" and get shelter and food. Then comes the rain, a cloudburst that re- laxes tension and makes the earth fertile. In mythology, rain was often thought to be a "love-union" between heaven and earth. In the Elciisinian mysteries, for instance, after every- thing had been purified by water, the caU wen to heaven: "Let it rain!" and down to up Left, the Greekmaiden wasimpregnatedbyZeusinthefom betweenheavenand eart . artistEdwin Landseer. earth: "Be fruitful!" This was understood as a sacred marriage of the gods. In this way rain can be said to represent a "solution" in the literal sense of the word. Coming down, Henr)' again meets the col- lective values sjTnbolized by the rucksack and motorcycle. He has passed through a phase in which he has strengthened his ego-conscious- ness by pro\-ing he can hold his own, and he has a renewed need for social contact. However, he accepts the suggestion of his friends that he should wait and fetch his thinp the next morn- ing. Thus he submits for the second time to adrice that comes from elsctvhcre: the first time, to the ad^ce of the old tvoman, to a subjective power, an archetypal figure; the second time, to a collective pattern. \Vith this step Henry has passed a milestone on the road to maturity. As an anticipation of the inner development that Heniy could hope to achieve through analysis, this dream tvas e.xtraordinarily pro- mising. The conflicting opposites that kept Hcniy's soul in tension were impressively sym- bolized. On the one hand, there was his con- scious urge to ascend, and on the otlicr his tendency to passive contemplation. Also, the image of the pathetic young woman in her white robes (representing Henry's sertsitive and romantic feelings) contrasts ^rith the bloated corpses in blue suits (representing his sterile in- tellectual \vorld). However, to overcome these obstacles and bring about a balance between them would be possible for Henry only after the most severe trials. Fear of the unconscious The problems we encountered in Henry's initial dream showed up in many others -- problems like vacillation between masculine activity and feminine passivity, or a tendency to hide be- hind intellectual asceticism. He feared the world, yet was attracted to it. Fundamentally, he feared the obligations of marriage, which demanded that he form a responsible relation- ship with a woman. Such an ambivalence is not unusual for someone on the tlireshold of manhood. Tliough in terms of age Henry' had left that phase behind him, his iimer maturity' did not match his years. This problem is often met in the introvert, with his fear of reality and outer life. The fourth dream that Henry' recounted provided a striking illustration of his psycho- logical state : It seems to me that I have had tliis dream endless times. Military service, long-distance race. Alone I go on my way. I never reach the goal. Will I be the last? Tire course is well known to me, all of it deja vu. Tlie start is in a litde wood, and the ground is covered witli dry leaves. The terrain slopes gently to an idyllic little brook that invites one to tarry. Later, tlierc is a dusty country' road. It leads toward Hombrechtikon, a small village near the upper lake of Zurich. A brook bordered by vrillows similar to a painting of Bocklin's in which a dreamy female figure follows the course of the water. Night falk. In a village I ask for directions to the road. I am told the road leads on for seven hours over a pass. I gather myself together and go on. However, this time the end of the dream differs. After the willow-bordered brook I get into a wood. There I discover a doe tliat runs away. I am proud of this observation. The doe has appeared on the left side and now I turn to the right. Here I see three strange creatures, half pig, half dog, with the legs of a kangaroo. The faces are quite undifferentiated, witli large droop- ing dog ears. Maybe they are costumed people. As a boy, I once masqueraded in the circus cos- tume of a donkey. The beginning of the dream is conspicuously like Henry's initial dream. A dreamlike female figure again appears, and the setting of the dream is associated with another painting by Bdcklin. This painting, called Autumn Thoughts, and the dry leaves mentioned earlier in the dream underline the autumnal mood. A romantic atmosphere also reappears in this dream. Apparently this inner landscape, repre- senting Henry's melancholy, is very familiar to him. Again he is in a collective of people, but this time with military comrades on a long- distance race. This whole situation (as the military service also suggests) might be regarded as a repre- sentation of an average man's fate. Henry him- self said : "It's a symbol of life." But the dreamer does not want to adjust to it. He goes on alone -- which was probably always the case with Henry. That is why he has the impres- sion that everything is deja vu. His thought ("I never reach the goal") indicates strong feel- ings of inferiority and a belief that he cannot win the "long-distance race." His way leads to Hombrechtikon, a name that reminds him of his secret plans to break away from home (Horn = home, brechen^ to break). But because this breaking away does not occur, he again (as in the initial dream) loses his sense of orientation and must ask for directions. Dreams compensate more or less explicitly for the dreamer's conscious attitude of mind. The romantic, maidenly figure of Henry's con- scious ideal is balanced by the appearance of the strange, female-like animals. Henry's world of instincts is symbolized by something femi- nine. The wood is a symbol of an unconscious area, a dark place where animals live. At first a doe -- a symbol of shy, fugitive, innocent womanliness -- emerges, but only for a moment. Then Henry sees three mixed-up animals of a strange and repulsive appearance. They seem to represent undifferentiated instinctuality -- a sort of confused mass of his instincts, contain- ing the raw material for a later development. Their most striking characteristic is that they are all virtually faceless, and thus without the slightest glimmerings of consciousness. In the minds of many people, the pig is closely associated to dirty sexuality. (Circe, for example, changed the men who desired her into swine.) The dog may stand for loyalty, but also for promiscuity, because it shows no discrimination in its choice of partners. The kangaroo, however, is often a symbol for moth- erliness and tender carrying capacity. All these animals present only rudimentary traits, and even these are senselessly contami- nated. In alchemy, the "prime material" was often represented by such monstrous and fabu- lous creatures -- mixed forms of animals. In psychological terms, they would probably sym- bolize the original total unconsciousness, out of which the individual ego can rise and begin to develop toward maturity. Left, Henry'sdrawing ofthe strange animals of hisdream.They are mute and biind, unabieto communicate, and so represent his unconscious state.Theanimai ontheground (which he coiored green, the coior of vegetationand nature,and in foik- iore asymboi ofhope) hints at possibilities ofgrowth and a chance of differentiation. Henry's fear of the monsters becomes evident by his attempt to make them seem harmless. He wants to convince himself that they are only dressed-up people, like himself in a boy- hood masquerade. His anxiety is natural. A man discovering such inhuman monsters in his inner self, as symbols of certain traits of his unconscious, has every reason to be afraid. Another dream also shows Henry's fear of the depths of the unconscious : I am a cabin boy in a sailing boat. Paradoxi- cally, the sails are spread, though there is a complete calm. My task consists of holding a rope that serves to fasten a mast. Strangely enough, the railing is a wall covered with stone slabs. This whole structure lies exacdy on the border between the water and the sailing boat that floats there alone. I hold fast to the rope (not to the mast) and I am forbidden to look into the water. In this dream Henry is in a psychological borderline situation. The railing is a wall that protects him but at the same time obstructs his view. He is forbidden to look into the water (tvhere he might discover unknowm powers). All these images reveal his doubt and fear. The man tvho fears the communications of his inner depths (like Henry) is as much afraid of the feminine element in himself as he is of real woman. At one moment he is fascinated by her, at another he tries to escape ; fascinated and terrified, he flees so as not to become her "prey." He does not dare to approach a be- loved (and therefore idealized) partner with his animal-like sexuality. As a typical result of his mother-tie, Henry had difficulty in giving both feeling and sensu- ality to the same w'oman. Again and again his dreams brought proof of his desire to free him- self from this dilemma. In one dream he w'as a "monk on a secret mission." In another, his instincts tempted him into a brothel : Together with a military comrade who has had many erotic adventures I find myself waiting in front of a house on a dark street in an unknown city. Entrance is permitted only to women. There- fore, in the hall, my friend puts on a little car- nival mask of a woman's face and goes up the stairs. Possibly I did the same as he, but I do not remember clearly. What this dream proposes ^vould satisfy Henry's curiosity -- but only at the price of a fraud. As a man he lacks the courage to enter the house, which is obviously a brothel. But if he divests himself of his masculinity, he might gain an insight into this forbidden world -- for- bidden by his conscious mind. The dream, however, does not tell us whether he decides to enter. Henry had not yet overcome his inhi- bitions -- an understandable failure if tve con- sider the implications of going into the brothel. The above dream seemed to me to reveal a homoerotic strain in Henry : He appeared to feel that a feminine "mask" would make him The pig-like animal ofthedream connotes bestialityand lustfulness -- as inthemyth of Circe,who turned men into swine.Above left,from a Greekvase, a pig-man, Odysseus, and Circe. Right, in one ofthe cartoonsbyGeorge Grosz attacking pre-warGerman society, aman (with a prostitute) isgiven a pig'shead toshow hisvulgarity. attractive to men. This hypothesis was sup- ported by the following dream : I find myself back in my fifth or sixth year.My playmate of those days tells me how he parti- cipated in an obscene act with the director of a factory. My friend laid his right hand on the man's penis to keep it warm and at the same time to warm his own hand. The director was an intimate friend of my father's whom I venerated for his broad and varied interests. But he was laughed at by us as an "eternal youth." For children of that age homoerotic play is not unusual. That Henry still came to it in his dream suggests that it was loaded with guilt feelings, and therefore strongly repressed. Such feelings were linked to his deep fear about form- ing a lasting tie with a woman. Another dream and its associations illustrated this conflict : I take part in the wedding of an unknown couple. At one in the morning the little wedding party returns from the festivities -- the bridal couple, the best man, and the maid of honor. They enter a large courtyard where I await them. It seems that the newlyweds have already had a quarrel, as well as the other couple. They finally find the solution by having the two men and the two women retire separately. Henry explained ; "You see here the war of the sexes as Giraudoux describes it." And then he added : "The palace in Bavaria, where I remember seeing this dream-courtyard, has until lately been disfigured by emergency housing for poor people. When I visited there, I asked myself if it would not be preferable to eke out a poor existence in the ruins of classic beauty than to lead an active life surrounded by the ugliness of a great city. I also asked myself when I was a witness at the wedding of a comrade whether his marriage would last, for his bride made an unfavorable impression on me." The longing to withdraw into passivity and introversion, the fear of an unsuccessful mar- riage, the dream's separation of the sexes -- all these are unmistakable symptoms of the secret doubts hidden beneath Henry's consciousness. The saint and the prostitute Henry's psychic condition was most impres- sively depicted in the following dream, which exposed his fear of primitive sensuality and his desire to escape into a kind of asceticism. In it one can see the direction his development was taking. For this reason the dream will be interpreted at greater length. I find myself on a narrow mountain road. On the left (going down) there is a deep abyss, on the right a wall of rock. Along the road there are several caves, shelters, cut out of the rock, as protection from the weather for lonely wan- derers. In one of these caves, half hidden, a prostitute has taken refuge. Strangely, I see her from behind, from the rock side. She has a form- less, spongy body. I look at her with curiosity and touch her buttocks. Perhaps, it suddenly seems to me, she is not a woman but a kind of male prostitute. This same creature comes then to the fore as a saint with a short crimson coat thrown around his shoulders. He strides down the road and goes into another, much larger cave fitted with rough- hewn chairs and benches. With a haughty look he drives out all those already present, also me. Then he and his followers move in and establish themselves. The personal association that Henry contri- buted to the prostitute was the "Venus of Wil- lendorf," a little carved figure (from the Paleo- litliic Age) of a fleshy woman, probably a nature or fertility goddess. Then he added : "I first heard tliat touching the buttocks is a fertility rite when I 'vas on a tour through the AS^allis [a canton in French Switzerland], where I TOited ancient Celtic graves and c-veavations. There I ^vas told that there was once a smooth sloping surface of tiles smeared with all kinds of substances. Infertile women had to slide do\vn on their bare buttocks in order to cure their sterility." To the coat of the ".saint," Henrv- a.ssociated this: "My fiancee owas a jacket of similar shape, but it's white. On the evening before the dream ^ve were out dancing, and she w.as wearing this white jacket. Another girl, rvho is her friend, was with us. She had a crimson jacket that I liked better." If dreams are not wish-fulfillments (as Freud taught) but rather, as Jung assumed, "self-re- presentations of the unconscious," then we must admit that Hcnr>''s ps)-chic condition could hardly be better represented than in the de- scription given in the "saint" dream. Henr)' is a "lonely wanderer" on the narrow path. But (perhaps thanks to anal>si.s) he is already on his way down from inhospitable heights. To the left, on the side of the uncon- scious, his road is bordered by the terrifying depths of an abyss. On the right side, the side of consciousness, the way is blocked by the rigid rock wall of his conscious vieus. How- ever, in the caves (which might represent, so to speak, unconscious areas in Henry's field of consciousness) there are places \s'hcrc refuge can be found when bad weather comes -- in other words, when outside tensions become too threatening. The eaves are the result of purposeful human ^vork : cut into the rock. In a way they re- .scmblc the gaps that occur in our conscious- ness when our power of concentration has reached its limits and is broken, so that the stuff of fantasy can penetrate without restraint. At such times something unexpected can reveal itself and allo\v a deep insight into the back- ground of the pss'chc -- a glimpse into the un- conscious regions where our imagination has free play. Morcox'cr, rock ca\'cs may be sjmbols of the womb of Mother Earth, appearing as mysterious caverns in which transformation and rebirth can come about. Thus the dream seems to represent Henr>''s introverted witl^d^a^val -- when the world be- comes too difficult for him -- into a "cave" with- in his consciousness where he can succumb to .subjective fant.Tsics. This interpretation would .ako c.xplain why he sees the female figure -- Left. Henry'sdrawing ofthe boat of hisdream,with a stone wail for a railing -- anotherimage of his introversionand fear of life. Right,the prehistoricsculpture known asthe"Venus ofWillendorf" -- one of Henry's associations to theimage ofthe prostitute in his dream. In thesamedream, the saint isseen in a sacred cave. Many actual caves are holyplaces -- like the Cave of Bernadette (farright) at Lourdes,where a vision ofthe Virgin Maryappearedto a girl. a replica of some of the inner feminine traits of his psyche. She is a formless, spongy, half- hidden prostitute representing the repressed image in his unconscious of a Avoman whom Henry would never have approached in con- scious life. She ^vould ahs'ays have been strictly taboo to him in spite of the fact that (as the opposite of a too-much venerated mother) the prostitute would have a secret fascination for him -- as for every son with a mother-comple.\. The idea of restricting a relationship ^vith a woman to a purely animal-like sensuality, ex- cluding all feelings, is often enticing to such a young man. In such a union he can keep his feelings split off, and thus can remain "true" to his mother in an ultimate sense. Thus, in spite of everj'thing, the taboo set by the mother against every other ^voman remains inflexibly effective in the psyche of the son. Henr)', who seems to have %vithdrawn totally to the background of his fantasy-cave, sees the prostitute only "from behind." He dares not look her in the face. But "from the back" also means from her least human side -- her buttocks (i.e., the part of her body that tvill stimulate the sensual activity of the male). By touching the buttocks of the prostitute, Henry unconsciously carries out a kind of fer- tility rite, similar to the rites that are practiced in many primitive tribes. The laying on of hands and healing often go together; in the same way, touching with the hand can be either a defense or a curse. Immediately the idea arises that the figure is not a %voman after all but a male prostitute. The figure thus becomes hermaphroditic, like many mythological figures (and like the "priest" figure of the first dream). Insecurity concerning his own sex can often be observed in a pubes- cent individual ; and for this reason homosexu- ality in adolescence is not considered unusual. Nor is such imcertainty exceptional for a young man with Henry's psychological structure; he had already implied this in some of his earlier dreams. But repression (as well as sexual uncertainty) may have caused the confusion about the sex of the prostitute. The female figure that has I A coatcan often symbolizethe outer mask.OTpersona thatone presentsto the world.The mantle ofthe prophet Elijah bore a similarmeaning ;When heascended to heaven (left, in a Swedish peasant painting), he left the mantle behindfor hissuccessor Elisha.Thusthe mantle represented the prophet'spowerand role, to be assumed by hissuccessor. (Note that the mantle isred, likethecoat of the saint in Henry'sdream.) both attracted and repelled the dreamer is transformed -- first of all into a man and then into a saint. The second transformation elimi- nates everything sexual from the image, and implies tliat the only means of escape from the reality of sex lies in the adoption of an ascetic and holy life, denying the flesh. Such dramatic reversals are common in dreams : Something turns into its opposite (as the prostitute becomes a saint) as if to demonstrate that by transmuta- tion even extreme opposites can change into each other. Henry' also satv something significant in the saint's coat. A coat is often a symbol of the protective cover ormask (ts'hich Jung called the persona) that an indi\'idual presents to the •world. It has tivo purposes : first, to make a specific impression on other people ; second, to conceal the individual's inner self from their prying eyes. The persona that Henry's dream gives the saint tells us something about his atti- tude to his fiancee and her friend. The saint's coat has the color of the friend's jacket, which Henry had admired, but it also had the shape of his fiancee's coat. This may imply that Henty's unconscious wanted to confer the quality of saintliness on both tvomen, in order to protect himself against their tvomanly attrac- tiveness. Also, the coat is red, which (as has been noted before) is traditionally the sy'mbolic color of feeling and passion. It thus gives the saint figure a kind of eroticized spirituality -- a quality that is frequendy found in men who repress their owm sexuality and try to rely solely on their "spirit" or reason. Such an escape from the world of the flesh, however, is unnatural in a young person. In the first half of life, we should learn to accept our sexuality : It is essential to the preservadon and continuation of our species. The dream seems to be reminding Henry' of just this point. When the saint leaves the cave and vvalks down the road (descending from the heights toward the valley'), he enters a second cave with rough-hewn benches and chairs, which reminds one of the early Christians' places of worship and refuge from persecution. This cave seems to be a healing, holy' place -- a place of meditation and of the mystery of transforma- tion from the earthly to the heavenly', from the carnal to the spiritual. Henry' is not permitted to follow the saint, but is turned out of the cave with all those present (that is, with his unconscious entities). Seemingly', Henry' and all the others who are not followers of the saint are being told that they' must live in the outside tvorld. The dream seems to say that Henry' must first succeed in outer life before he will be able to immerse him- self in a religious or spiritual sphere. The figure of the saint also seems to symbolize (in a rela- tively undifferentiated, anticipatory' fashion) the Self ; but Hemy is not yet mature enough to stay in the immediate vicinity of this figure. Henry'stouching the prostitute can be related tothe belief inthe magical effectofatouch : Left, the 17th-century IrishmanValentine Greatrakes,famous forhealing by layingon ofhands. Right, another example of the persona : The clothing worn by modern British "beatnik" youths indicates the values and way of life that they svant to display to the outer world. How the analysis developed In spite of an initial skepticism and resistance, Henr\- b^an to take a lively interest in the inner happenings of his p5}'che. He was ob\'i- onsly impressed by his dreams. They seemed to compensate for his conscious life in a mean- ingful \s-zy and to give him s-aluable insights into his ambh-alence, his vacillation, and his preference for passhfu*. After a time more posithe dreams appeared that showed that Henry- -svas already 'Svell on his T^vo months after his anal\-sis had begtm he reported this dream: In the harbor of a iitde place not far from my honre, on the shore of a lake in the neighborhood, locornom-es and freight cars are being raised from the bottom of the lake ^•.here they had been rank in the last T.s-ar. First a large cylinder like a locomotive boiler is brought up. Then an enor- mous, rust}- freight car. The whole picture pre- sents a horrible yet romantic sight. The reco^-ered pieces have to be transported a\vay under the rails and cables of the nearby rail\s-ay statioa. Then the bottom of the lake changes into a green rceado-.v. Here we see what a remarkable inner ad- vznce Hemy- has made. Locomoth-es (probahly symbols of energj- and d\-namism) have been "simk"' -- ^i.e., repressed into the tmconsdo-us -- but are notv being brought into the light of day. 'With them are freight cars, in tvhich ah kinds of t-aluable cargo (psy-chic qualities) can be transported. Notv that these "objects" have again become available for Henry's conscious life, he can b^in to realize hotv much active power could be at his disposal. The transforma- tion of the dark lake bottom into a meadov.- underlines his potential for podth-e action. Sometimes, on Henry's "lonely Joumej-" to- ward maturity-, he also receh-ed help from his feminine side. In his 24th dream he meets a "humpbacked girl" : I am on the way to a school together with an unknown young lady of small and dainty appear- ance but disfigured by a hmnp. Many other people also go into the schoolhouse. While the others disperse to different rooms for singing lessons, the girl and I sit at a little square table. She gives me a private singing lesson. I feel an impulse of pity for her and therefore kiss her on the mouth. I am conscious, however, that by this act I am unfaithful to my fiancee -- even though it may be excusable. Singing is one of the immediate expressions of feelings. But (aswe have seen) Henry is afraid of his feelings; he knows them only in an idealized adolescent form. Nevertheless, in this dream he is taught singing (the expression of feelings) at a square table. The table, %vith its four equal sides, is a representation of the "fourfoldness" motif, usually a symbol of com- pleteness. Thus the relation bebveen singing As inthe painting, left (bythe ISth-centuiy British artistWilliam Turner), entitledRain,Steam,and Speed,thelocomotive is clearlyan image ofdriving,dynamicenergy. In Henry'sdream (whichhe drew, below), locomotives are raised out ofa lake -- anexpression ofthe release of a potential forvaluable actionthathad previouslybeen repressed into his unconscious. and the square table seems to indicate that Henry must integrate his "feeling" side before he can achieve psychic wholeness. In fact, the singing lesson does move his feelings, and he kisses the girl on hermouth. Thereby he has, in a sense, "espoused" her (otherwise he would not feel "unfaithful") ; he has learned to relate to "the woman tvithin." Another dream demonstrates the part that this little humpbacked girl had to play in Henry's inner development : I am in an unkno^vn boys' school. During the instruction period I secretly force my way into the house, I don't know for what purpose. I hide in the room behind a little square closet. The door to the corridor is half open. I fear being detected. An adult goes by without seeing me. But a little humpbacked girl comes in and sees me at once. She pulls me out of my hiding place. Not only does the same girl appear in both dreams, but both appearances take place in a schoolhouse. In each instance Henry must learn something to assist his development. Seemingly, he tvould like to satisfy his desire for know- ledge while remaining unnoticed and passive. The figure of a deformed little girl appears in numerous fairy tales. In such tales the ugli- ness of the hump usually conceals great beauty, which is revealed when the "right man" comes to free the girl from a magic spell -- often by a kiss. The girl in Henry's dream may be a symbol of Henry's soul, which also has to be released from the "spell" that has made it ugly. When the humpbacked girl tries to awaken Henry's feelings by song, or puUs him out of his dark hiding place (forcing him to confront the fight of day), she shows hersefi as a helpful guide. Henry can and must in a sense belong simultaneously to both his fiancee and the little humpbacked girl (to the first as a representative of the real, outer woman, and to the second as the embodiment of the inner psychic anima). The oracle dream People who rely totally on their rational think- ing and dismiss or repress every manifestation of their psychic life often have an almost inex- plicable inclination to superstition. They listen to oracles and prophecies and can be easily hoodwinked or influenced by magicians and conjurers. And because dreams compensate one's outer life, the emphasis such people put on their intellect is offset by dreams in which they meet the irrational and cannot escape it. Henry experienced this phenomenon in the course of his analysis, in an impressive way. Four extraordinary dreams, based on such irra- tional themes, represented decisive milestones in his spiritual development. The first of these came about 10 weeks after the analysis began. As Henry reported the dream : Alone on an adventurous journey through South America I feel, at last, the desire to return home. In a foreign city situated on a mountain I try to reach the railway station, which I in- stinctively suspect to be in the center of the town at its highest level. I fear I may be too late. Fortunately, however, a vaulted passage breaks through the row of houses on my right, built closely together as in the architecture of the Middle Ages, forming an impenetrable wall be- hind which the station is probably to be found. The whole scene offers a very picturesque aspect. I see the sunny, painted fagades of the houses, the dark archway in whose shadowy obscurity four ragged figures have settled down on the pave- ment. With a sigh of relief, I hurry toward the passage -- ^when suddenly a stranger, a trapper- type, appears ahead of me evidently filled with the same desire to catch the train. At our approach the four gatekeepers, who turn out to be Chinese, jump up to prevent our passage. In the ensuing fight my left leg is in- jured by the long nails on the left foot of one of the Chinese. An oracle has to decide now whether the way could be opened to us or whether our lives must be forfeited. I am the first to be dealt with. While my com- panion is bound and led aside, the Chinese con- sult the oracle by using little ivory sticks. The judgment goes against me, but I am given an- other chance. I am fettered and led aside, just as my companion was, and he now takes my place. In his presence, the oracle has to decide my fate for the second time. On this occasion it is in my favor. I am saved. One immediately notices the singularity and the exceptional meaning of this dream, its wealth of symbols, and its compactness. How- ever, it seemed as if Henry's conscious mind wanted to ignore the dream. Because of his skep- ticism toward the products of his unconscious it was important not to expose-the dream to the danger of rationalization, but rather to let it act on him without interference. So I re- frained at first from my interpretation. Instead I offered only one suggestion: I advised him to read and then to consult (as did the Chinese figures in his dream) the famous Chinese oracle book, the I Ching. The I Ching, the so-called "Book of Changes," is a very ancient book of wisdom; its roots go back to mythical times, and it comes to us in its present form from 3000 B.c. Accord- ing to Richard Wilhelm (who translated it into German and provided an admirable commen- tary), both of the two main branches of Chinese philosophy -- ^Taoism and Confucianism -- ^have their common origin in the I Ching. The book is based on the hypothesis of the oneness of man and the surrounding cosmos, and of the complementary pairs of opposites Yang and Yin (i.e., the male and female principles). It consists of 64 "signs" each represented by a drawing made up of six lines. In these signs are contained all the possible combinations of Yang and Yin. The straight lines are looked upon as male, the broken lines as female. Each sign describes changes in the human or cosmic situation, and each prescribes, in a pictorial language, the course of action to be followed at such times. The Chinese consulted this oracle by means that indicated rs'hich of the signs rvas relevant at a given moment. They did so by using 50 small sticks in a rather com- plicated rvay that yielded a given number. (Incidentally, Henry said that he had once read -- probably in Jung's commentar)' on "The Secret of the Golden Flower" -- of a strange game sometimes used by the Chinese to find out about the future.) Today the more usual method of consulting the I Ching is to use three coins. Each throw of the three coins ^delds one line. "Heads," which stand for a male line, count as three; "tails," a broken female line, count as trvo. The coins are throrvn six times, and the num- bers that are produced indicate the sign or hexagram (i.e., the set of six lines) to be consulted. But what significance has such "fortune tell- ing" for our own time ? Even those who accept the idea that the I Ching is a storehouse of UTsdom ^vill find it hard to believe that con- sultation of the oracle is anjOhing more than an experiment in the occult. It is indeed diffi- cult to grasp that more is involved, for the ordinary person today consciously dismisses all divining techniques as archaic nonsense. Yet they are not nonsense. As Dr. Jung has shoum, they are based on what he calls the "principle of s^mchronicity" (or, more simply, meaningful coincidence). He has described this difficult new idea in his essay "S^mchronicity : An Acausal Connecting Principle." It is based on the assumption of an inner unconscious knowledge that links a phj'sical event with a psychic con- dition, so that a certain event that appears "accidental" or "coincidental" can in fact be psychically meaningful ; and its meaning is often symbolically indicated through dreams that coincide trith the event. Several tv'eeks after having studied the I Ching, Henry followed my suggestion (with considerable skepticism) and threw the coins. What he found in the book had a tremendous impact on him. Briefly, the oracle to which he referred bore several startling references to his dream, and to his psychological condition gen- erally. By a remarkable "synchronistic" coinci- dence, the sign that ^vas indicated by the coin- pattern rs'as called Meng -- or "Youthful FoUy." HewiWw fiZowttV am yortiM atowem. Tta it tW •>7*, erfdoer Vje I »T * ll ii BSt I fad: TWrose fad imkjw. At I k-'oraUa. IfWaAitwaftju too.>k UUm (1/ Daitkm Tecnrrx ycUT Awi Aofw •! BOBStaia nl daektSi Oe fsCy. 'Ai AtWorw.mMoaia •«»Wtak?* liold M,M a ev aBradMd 1k>tM pi m*r7 .gfat AcUad itCj. *r«iT kx pwtsfc*©« »%• ouieiJ* •pee Ac rykl toe iw ka fadwb tWtwfadan TAIA* fcdwxfc I -iWT-Wtm tice ii£m cadoaAal. *lf aibtwaArteAaee> IIWbpetKfc Xrx* BBWe." T« BpertaBe faCy. T»e«B*A«s n«%l •f»J *»•W? talk. TW TakedA.koacw •'"C""^***"*r Left,two pages ofthe /Ching showingthehexagramMENG (which standsfor"youthful folly").The topthree lines ofthehexagram symbolize a mountain,andcan also represent a gate ;the bottom three linessymbolizewaterandtheabyss. Right, Henry'sdrawing ofthesword and helmetthatappearedtohim in a fantasy,and that also related to a section ofthe /Ching -- Li, "the clinging, fire." In this chapter there are several parallels to the dream motifs in question. According to the text of the I Ching, the three upper lines of this hexagram symbolize a mountain, and have the meaning of "keeping still" ; they can also be interpreted as a gate. The three lower lines sym- bolize water, the abyss, and the moon. All these symbols have occurred in Henry's previous dreams. Among many other statements that seemed to apply to Henry was the following warning: "For youthful foUy, it is the most hopeless thing to entangle itself in empty imag- inings. The more obstinately it clings to such unreal fantasies the more certainly will humilia- tion overtake it." In this and other complex ways, the oracle seemed to be directly relevant to Henry's prob- lem. This shook him. At first he tried to sup- press its effect by willpower, but he could not escape it or his dreams. The message of the I Ching seemed to touch him deeply in spite of the puzzling language in which it was expressed. He became overpowered by the very irration- ality whose existence he had so long denied. Sometimes silent, sometimes irritated, reading the words that seemed to coincide so strongly with the symbols in his dreams, he said, "I must think all this over thoroughly," and he left before our session was up. He cancelled his next session by telephone, because of influenza, and did not reappear. I waited ("keeping still") because I supposed that he might hot yet have digested the oracle. A month went by. Finally Henry reappeared, excited and disconcerted, and toldme what had happened in the meantime. Initially his intel- lect (which he had until then relied upon so much) had suffered a great shock -- and one that he had at first tried to suppress. However, he soon had to admit that the communications of the oracle were pursuing him. He had in- tended to consult the book again, because in his dream the oracle had been consulted twice. But the text of the chapter "Youthful Folly" expressly forbids the putting of a second ques- tion. For two nights Henry had tossed sleep- lessly in his bed; but on the third a luminous dream image of great power had suddenly appeared before his eyes: a helmet with a sword floating in empty space. Henry immediately took up the I Ching again and opened it at random to a commen- tary on Chapter 30, where (to his great sur- prise) he read the following passage: "The clinging is fire, it means coats of mail, helmets, it means lances and weapons." Now he felt that he understood why a second intentional consulting of the oracle was forbidden. For in his dream the ego was excluded from the second question; it was the trapper who had to consult the oracle the second time. In the same way, it was Henry's semi-unconscious action that had unintentionally asked the second question of the I Ching by opening the book at random and coming upon a symbol that coincided with his nocturnal vision. Henry was clearly so deeply stirred that it seemed time to try to interpret the dream that had sparked the transformation. In view of the events of the dream, it was obvious that the dream-elements should be interpreted as con- tents of Henry's inner personality and the six dream-figures as personification of his psychic qualities. Such dreams are relatively rare, but when they do occur their after-effects are all the more powerful. That is why they could be called "dreams of transformation." With dreams of such pictorial power, the dreamer seldom has more than a few personal associations. All Henry could offer was that he had recently tried for a job in Chile, and had been refused because they would not employ unmarried men. He also knew that some Chinese let the nails of their left hand grow as a sign that instead of working they have given themselves over to meditation. Henry's failure (to get a job in South America) was presented to him in the dream. In it he is transported into a hot southern Right,a parallel tothegatekeepers ofHenry's "oracledream" :one of a pairofsculptures (10th-13th century) thatguard the entrance to China's Mai-chi-san caVes. world -- a world that, in contrast to Europe, he would call primitive, uninhibited, and sensual. It represents an excellent symbolic picture of the realm of the unconscious. This realm was the opposite of the cultivated intellect and Swiss puritanism that ruled Henry's conscious mind. It was, in fact, his natural "shadow land," for which he had longed ; but after a while he did not seem to feel too com- fortable there. From the chthonic, dark, maternal powers (symbolizedby South America) he is drawn back in the dream to the light, personal mother and to his fiancee. He sud- denly realizes how far he has gone away from them ; he finds himself alone in a "foreign city." This increase in consciousness is symbolized in the dream as a "higher level" ; the city was built on a mountain. So Henry "climbed up" to a greater consciousness in the "shadow land"; from there he hoped "to find his way home." This problem of ascending a mountain had already been put to him in his inidal dream. And, as in the dream of the saint and the prostitute, or in many mythological tales, a mountain often symbolizes a place of revela- tion, where transfoimation and change may take place. The "city on the mountain" is also a well- known archetypal symbol that appears in the history of our culture in many variations. The city, corresponding in its ground-plan to a man- dala, represents that "region of the soul" in the middle of which the Self (the psyche's inner- most center and totality) has its abode. Surprisingly, the seat of the Self is repre- sented in Henry's dream as a traffic center of the human collective -- a railway station. This may be because the Self (if the dreamer is young and has a relatively low level of spiritual development) is usually symbolized by an object from the realm of his personal experience -- often a banal object, which compensates the dreamer's high aspirations. Only in the mature person acquainted with the images of his soul is the Self realized in a symbol that corresponds to its unique value. Even though Henry does not actually know where the station is, he nevertheless supposes it to be in the center of the city, on its highest point. Here, as in earlier dreams, he receives help from his unconscious. Henry's conscious mind ^vas identified with his profession as an engineer, so he ^vould also like his inner world to relate to rational products of civilization, like a railway station. The dream, however, rejects this attitude and indicates a completely dif- ferent way. The way leads "under" and through a dark arch. An arched gate^vay is also a symbol for a threshold, a place where dangers lurk, a place that at the same time separates and unites. Instead of the railway station that Henry was looking for, ^vhich was to connect uncivilized South America wth Europe, Henry finds him- self before a dark arched gateway where four ragged Chinese, stretched on the ground, block the passage. The dream makes no distinction beUveen them, so they may be seen as four still undifferentiated aspects of a male totality. (The number four, a symbol of wholeness and com- pleteness, represents an archetype that Dr. Jung has discussed at length in his writings.) The Chinese thus represent unconscious male psychic parts of Henry that he cannot pass, be- cause the "way to the Self" (i.e., to the psychic center) is barred by them and must still be opened to him. Until this issue has been settled he cannot continue his journey. Still unaware of the impending danger, Henry hurries to the gateway, expecting at last to reach the station. But on his way he meets his "shadow" -- ^his unlived, primitive side, which appears in the guise of an earthy, rough trapper. The appearance of this figure probably means that Henry's introverted ego has been joined by his extraverted (compensatory) side, which represents his repressed emotional and irrational traits. This shadow figure pushes itself past the conscious ego into the foreground, and, because it personifies the activity and autonomy of unconscious qualities, it becomes the proper carrier of fate, through whom everything happens. The dream moves toward its climax. During the fight between Henry, the trapper, and the four ragged Chinese, Henry's left leg is scratched by the long nails on the left foot of one of the four. (Here, it seems, the European character of Henry's conscious ego has collided with a personification of the ancient wisdom of the East, with the extreme opposite of his ego. The Chinese come from an entirely different psychic continent, from an "other side" that is still quite unknown to Henry and that seems dangerous to him.) The Chinese can also be said to stand for the "yellow earth"; for the Chinese people are related to the earth as few people are. And it is just this earthy, chthonic quality that Henry had to accept. The unconscious male totality of his psyche, which he met in his dream, had a chthonic material aspect that his intellectual conscious side lacked. Thus the fact that he recognized the four ragged figures as Chinese shows that Henry had gained an increase of inner awareness concerning the nature of his adversaries. Henry had heard that the Chinese sometimes let the nails of their left hands grow long. But in the dream the long nails are on the left foot ; they are, so to speak, claws. This may indicate that the Chinese have a point of view so dif- ferent from Henry's that it injures him. As we Below, a drawing by a patient under analysis depicts a black monster (on the red or "feeling" side) and a Madonna-like woman (on the blue or spiritual side). This was Henry's position : over-emphasis on purity, chastity, etc. and fear of the irrational unconscious. (But note that the green, mandala-like flower acts as a link between the opposing sides.) Below left, another patient's painting depicting his insomnia -- caused by his repressing too strongly his passionate, red, instinctual drives (which may overwhelm his consciousness) by a black "wall" of anxiety and depression. know, Henry's conscious attitude toward the chthonic and feminine, toward the material depths of his nature, was most imcertain and ambivalent This attitude, symbolized by his "left leg" (the point of view or "standpoint" of his feminine, unconscious side of which he is stiU afraid) was harmed by the Chinese. This "injury,'' however, did not itself bring about a change in Henry. Every transforma- tiondemands as its precondition "the ending of a world" -- ^the collapse of an old philosophy ,of life. As Dr. Henderson has pointed out earlier in this book, at ceremonies of initiation a youth must suffer a symbolic death before he can be reborn as a man and be taken into the tribe as a full member. Thus the scientific, logical attitude of the engineer must collapse to make room for a new attitude. In the psy'che of an engineer, everything "iixational" may be repressed, and therefore often reveals itself in the dramatic paradoxes of the dream-^vorld. Thus the irrational appeared in Henry's dream as an "oracle game" of for- eign origin, with a fearful and inexplicable power to decide human destinies. Henry's rational ego had no alternative but to surrender imconditionally in a real sacrificium intellectus. Yet the conscious mind of such an ine.xperi- enced, immature person as Henry is not suffi- ciently prepared for such an act He loses the turn of fortune, and his life is forfeit. He is caught, unable to go on in his accustomed ^\•ay or to retiun home -- ^to escape his adult respon- sibilities. (It w'as this insight for which Henry had to be prepared by this "great dream.") Next, Henry's conscious, civilized ego is bound and put aside ^vhile the primitive trap- per is allowed to take his place and to consult the orade. Henr\''s life depends on the result. But ^s'hen the ego is imprisoned in isolation, those contents of the unconsdous that are per- sonified in the shadors'-figure may bring hdp and solution. This becomes possible rvhen one recognizes the existence of such contents and has experienced their power. They can then become our consdously accepted constant com- panions. Because the trapper (his shadow) ^\'ins thegame in his place,Hemy is saved. Facing the irrational Henry's subsequent behavior dearly showed that the dream (and the fact that his dreams and the orade book of the I Ching had brought him to face deep and irrational po\vers ^rithin himself) had a very deep effect on him. From then on he listened eagerly to the commimica- tions of his imconscious, and the analvds took on a more and more agitated character. The tension that until then had threatened the depths of his psyche rvith disruption came to the surface. Neverthdess, he courageously hdd to the gro^s•ing hope that a satisfactory' condu- sion would be reached. Bardy trvo weeks after the orade dream (but before it was discussed and interpreted), Henry had another dream in which he was once again confronted \rith the disturbing problem of the irrational : Alone in my room. A lot of disgusting black beetles crawl out of a hole and spread out over my drawing table. I try' to drive them back into their hole by means of some sort of magic. I am successful in this except for four or five beedes, which leave my table again and spread out into the whole room. I give up the idea of following them further; they are no longer so disgusting to me. I set fire to the hiding place,h tall column of flame rises up. I fear my room might catch fire, but this fear is unfoimded. By this time, Henry had become rdativdy skilful in the interpretation of his dreams, so he tried to give this dream an explanation of his own. He said : "The beetles aremy dark quali- ties. They rvere awakened by the analysis and come up now to the surface. There is a danger that they may overflorv my professional work (symbolized by the drawing table). Yet I did not dare to crush the beetles, ^vhich reminded me of a kind of black scarab, withmy hand as I first intended, and therefore had to use 'magic.' In setting fire to their hiding place I, so to speak, call for the collaboration of some- thing divine, as the upshootmg column of flame makesme think of the fire that I associate wth the Ark of the Covenant." To go deeper into the symbolism of the dream, we must first of all note that these beetles are black, which is the color of darkness, depression, and death. In the dream, Henry is "alone" in his room -- a situation that can lead to introversion and corresponding states of gloom. In mythology, scarab beedes often appear golden; in Egypt they were sacred animals symbolizing the sun. But if they are black, they symbolize the opposite side of the sun -- ^something devilish. Therefore, Henry's instinct is quite correct in wanting to fight the beedes with magic. Though four or five of the beedes remain alive, the decrease in the number of beedes is enough to free Henry from his fear and disgust. He then tries to destroy their breeding ground by fire. This is a positive action, because fire can symbolically lead to transformation and re- birth (as, for instance, it does in the ancient myth of the phoenix). In his waking life, Henry now seemed full of enterprising spirit, but apparendy he had not yet learned to use it to the right effect. There- fore, I want to consider another, later dream that throws an even clearer light on his prob- lem. This dream presents in symboh'c language Hemys fear of a responsible relationship \vith a woman and his tendency to withdraw from the feeling side of life : An old man is breathing his last He is sur- rounded by his relatives, and I am among them. More and more people gather in the large room, each one characterizing himself through precise statements. There are a good 40 persons present The old man groans and mutters about "unlived life." His daughter, who wants to make his con- fession easier, asks him in what sense "unhved" is to be understood; whether cultural or moral. The old man will not answer. His daughter sends me to a small adjoining room where I am to find the answer by telling a fortune with cards. The "nine" that I turn up will give the answer, according to the color. Above, an Egyptian relief (c. 1300 B.c.) shows ascarab beetleandthe godAmon withinthe circle ofthe sun. In Egyptthegolden scarabwas itselfasymbolofthe sun. Below, a quitedifferent kind of insect, more likethe "devilish" beetles ofHenry'sdream :an engraving by the 19th-century artistJames Ensor ofhumanswith dark, repulsive insectbodies. I expect to turn up a nine at the verj' begin- ning, but at first I turn up various kings and queens. I am disappointed. Now I turn up no- thing but scraps of paper that don't belong to the game at all. Finally, I discover that there are no more cards in the deck but only envelopes and other pieces of paper. Together ^s•ith my sister, who is also present, I look every\s-here for the cards. Finally I discover one under a textbook or a notebook. It is nine, a nine of spades. It seems to me that this can only mean one thing : that it was moral chains that prevented the old man from "living his life." The essential message of this strange dream was to tvam Henr)' tvhat awaited him if he failed to "live his life." The "old man" prob- ably represents tlie dying "ruling principle" -- the principle that rules Henr)''s consciousness, but whose nature is unknown to him. The 40 people present sj-mbolize the totality of Henr)''s psj'chic traits (40 is a number of totality', an elerated fonn of the number four). That the old man is dj-ing could be a sign that part of Henty-'s male personality' is on the verge of a final transformation. The daughter's quer)' about the possible cause of death is the unavoidable and decisive question. There seems to be an implication that the old man's "morality'" has pre^'ented him from living out his natural feelings and drives. Yet the djing man hinrself is silent. Therefore his daughter (the personification of the mediat- ing feminine principle, the anima) has to be- come active. She sends Henry' to discover the ans^ver from the fortune-telling cards -- the ansAver that will be given by the color of the first nine turned up. The fortune telling has to take place in an un- used, remote room (revealing how far a'vay such a happening is from Henry''s conscious attitude). He is disappointed ts-hen at first he uncovers only kings and queens (perhaps collective images of his y'outhful veneration for power and rs'ealth). This disappointment becomes in- tense tvhen the picture-cards run out, for this shows that the symbols of the irmer world have also been exhausted. Only "scraps of paper'' are left, without any images. Thus the source of pictures dries up in the dream. Henry then has to accept the help of his feminine side (this time represented by his sister) to find the last card. Together tvith her, he finally finds a card -- the nine of spades. It is this card that must serve to indicate by its color what the phrase "unlived life" meant in the dream. And it is significant that the card is hidden under a text- book or notebook -- which probably represents the arid intellectual formulas of Heiuy''s tech- nical interests. The nine has been a "magic number" for centuries. According to the traditional symbol- ism of numbers, it represents the perfect form of the perfected Trinity' in its threefold eleva- tion. And there are endless other meanings associated with the number nine in various ages and cultures. The color of the nine of spades is the color of death and of lifelessness. Also, the "spade" image strongly brings to mind the form of a leaf, and therefore its blackness emphasizes that instead of being green, rital, and natural it is now dead. Furthermore, the word "spade" derives from the Itah'an spada, rs'hich means "srvord" or "spear." Such rveapons often sym- bolize the penetrating, "cutting" function of the intellect. Thus the dream makes it clear that it was the "moral bonds" (rather than "cultural") that did not allotv the old man to "live his life." In Henry''s case, these "bonds" probably were his fear of surrendering fully to life, of accepting responsibilities to a woman and thereby becom- ing "unfaithful" to his mother. The dream has declared that the "unlived life" is an illness of which one can die. Henry could no longer disregard the message of this dream. He realized that one needs some- thing more than reason as a helpful compass in the entanglements of life ; it is necessary' to seek the guidance of the unconscious potvers that emerge as symbols out of the depths of the psyche. ^Vith this recognition, the goal of this part of his analysis was reached. He now knetv that he rvas finally e.xpelled from the paradise of an uncommitted life and that he could never return to it. The final dream Above, a phoenixreborn inflames (from a medieval Arabic manuscript) -- awell-known example ofthe motifofdeathand rebirth by fire. Below, an engraving bythe 1 9th- century French artist Grandville reflectssome ofthesymbolicvalue of playing cards.TheSpades suit, for instance, in French Piques, is symbolically linkedwiththe "penetrating" intellectand, by its black color, with death. A further dream came to confirm irrevocably the insights Henry had gained. After some un- important short dreams that concerned his everyday life, the last dream (the 50th in the series) appeared with all the wealth of symbols that characterizes the so-called "great dreams." Four of us form a friendly group, and we have the following experiences : Evening. We are sit- ting at a long, raw-lumber table and drinking out of each of three different vessels ; from a liqueur glass, a clear, yellow, sweet liqueur; from a wine glass, dark red Campari; from a large, classically shaped vessel, tea. In addition to us there is also a girl of reserved, delicate nature. She pours her liqueur into the tea. Night : We have returned from a big drinking bout. One of us is the President de la Republique Frangaise. We are in his palace. Walking out onto the balcony we perceive him beneath us in the snowy street as he, in his drunken condition, urinates against a mound of snow. His bladder content seems to be inexhaustible. Now he even runs after an old spinster who carries in her arms a child wrapped in a brown blanket. He sprays the child with Iris urine. The spinster feels the moisture but ascribes it to the child. She hurries away with long steps. Morning : Through the street, which glistens in the winter sun, goes a Negro ; a gorgeous figure, completely naked. He walks toward the east, toward Berne (that is, the Swiss capital). We are in French Switzerland. We decide to go to pay him a visit. Noon : After a long automobile trip through a lonely snowy region we come to a city, and into a dark house where the Negro is said to have put up. We are very much afraid that he might be frozen to death. However, his servant, who is just as dark, receives us. Negro and servant are mute. We look into the rucksacks we have brought with us, to see what each could give the Negro as a gift. It must be some sort of object charac- teristic of civilization. I am the first to make up my mind and I take a package of matches from the floor and offer it to the Negro'with deference. After all have presented their gifts, we join with the Negro in a happy feast, a joyous revel. Even at first glance the dream %vith its four parts makes an unusual impression. It encom- passes a whole day and moves toward the "right," in the direction of growing conscious- ness. The movement starts with the evening, goes over into the night, and ends at noon, when the sun is at its zenith. Thus the cycle of the "day" appears as a totahty pattern. In this dream the four friends seem to sym- bolize the unfolding masculinity of Henry's psyche, and their progress through the four "acts" of the dream has a geometric pattern that reminds one of the essential construction of the mandala. As they first came from the east, then from the west, moving on toward the "capital" of Switzerland (i.e., the center), they seem to describe a pattern that tries to unite the opposites in a center. And this point is underlined by the movement in time -- the de- scent into the night of the unconsciousness, fol- lowing the sun's circuit, which is followed by an ascent to the bright zenith of consciousness. The dream begins in the evening, a time when the threshold of consciousness is lowered and the impulses and images of the unconscious can pass across it. In such a condition (when the feminine side of man is most easily evoked) it is natural to find that a female figure joins the four friends. She is the anima figure that belongs to them all ("reserved and delicate," reminding Henry of his sister) and cormects them all to each other. On the table stand three vessels of different character, which by their concave form accentuate the receptiveness that is symbolic of the feminine. The fact that these vessels are used by all present indicates a mutual and close relatedness among them. The vessels differ in form (liqueur glass, wine glass, and a classically formed container) and in the color of their contents. The opposites into which these fluids divide -- sweet and bitter, red and yellow, intoxicating and sobering -- are all intermingled, through being consumed by each of the five persons present, who sink into an unconscious communion. The girl seems to be the secret agent, the catalyst who precipitates events (for it is the role of the anima to lead a man into his un- conscious, and thus to force him. to deeper recollection and increased consciousness). It is almost as though rvith the mixing of liqueur and tea the party ^vould approach its climax. The second part of the dream tells us more of the happenings of this "night." The four friends suddenly find themselves in Paris (which, for the Swiss, represents the town of sensuality, of uninhibited joy and love). Here a certain differentiation of the four takes place, especially between the ego in the dream (which is to a great extent identified \vith the leading thinking function) and the "President de la Re- publique," who represents the undeveloped and unconscious feeling function. The ego (Henry and two friends, who may be considered as representing his semi-conscious functions) looks down from the heights of a balcony on the President, whose characteristics are exactly what one \vould expect to find in the undifferentiated side of the psyche. He is unstable, and has abandoned himself to his instincts. He urinates on the street in a drunken state ; he is unconscious of himself, like a person outside civilization, following only his natural animal urges. Thus the President symbolizes a great contrast to the consciously accepted stan- dards of a good middle-class Swiss scientist. Only in the darkest night of the unconscious could this side of Henry reveal itself. However, the President-figure also has a very positive aspect. His urine (which could be the symbol of a stream of psychic hbido) seems in- exhaustible. It gives evidence of abundance, of creative and vital strength. (Primitives, for in- stance, regard everything coming from the body -- hair, excrement, urine, or saliva -- as creative, as having magical powers.) This unpleasant President-image, therefore, could also be a sign of the power and plenty that often adheres to the shadow side of the ego. Not only does he urinate without embarrassment, but he runs after an old woman who is holding a child. This "old spinster" is in a way the opposite or complement of the shy, fragile anima of the first part of the dream. She is still a virgin, even though old and seemingly a mother; in fact, Henry associated her to the archetypal image of Mary \vith the child Jesus. But the fact that the baby is wrapped in a brown (earth-colorcd) blanket makes it seem tobe the chthonic, earth- bound counter-image of the Savior rather than a heavenly child. The President, who sprinkles the child with his urine, seems to perform a travesty of baptism. If we take the child as a symbol of a potentiahty within Henry that is still infantile, then it could receive strength through this ritual. But the dream says nothing more ; the woman hurries away with the chUd. This scene marks the turning point of the dream. It is morning again. Everything that was dark, black, primitive, and powerful in the last episode has been gathered together and symbolized by a magnificent Negro, who appears naked -- ^i.e., real and true. Just as darkness and bright morning -- or hot urine and cold snow -- are opposites, so now the black man and the white landscape form a sharp antithesis. The four friends now must orient themselves within these new dimensions. A drinking vesselfrom ancient Peru, in theshape ofawoman, reflectsthe femininesymbolism ofsuch containers,which occurs in Henry's final dream. Their position has changed; the way that led through Paris has brought them unexpectedly into French Switzerland (where Henry's fian- cee came from). A transformation has taken place in Henry during the earlier phase, when he was overpowered by unconscious contents of his psyche. Now, for the first time, he can begin to find his way forward from a place that was his fiancee's home (showing that he accepts her psychological background). At the beginning he went from eastern Switzerland to Paris (from the east to the rvest, where the way leads into darkness, the imcon- sciousness). He has now made a turn of 180°, toward the rising sun and the ever-increasing clarity of consciousness. This way points to the middle of Switzerland, to its capital, Berne, and symbolizes Henry's striving toward a center that would unite the opposites within him. The Negro is for some people the archetypal image of "the dark primal creature" and thus a personification of certain contents of the un- conscious. Perhaps this is one reason why the Negro is so often rejected and feared by people of the white race. In him the white man sees his living counterpart. Ids hidden, dark side brought before his eyes. (This is just what most people try to avoid ; they want to cut it off and repress it.) White men project onto the Negro the primitive drives, the archaic powers, the uncontrolled instincts that they do not want to admit in themselves, of which they are uncon- scious, and that they therefore designate as the corresponding quahties of other people. For a young man of Henry's age the Negro may stand on the one hand for tlie sum of all dark traits repressed into unconsciousness; on the other hand, he may represent the sum of his primitive, masculine strength and poten- tialities, his emotional and physical power.That Henry and his friends intend consciously to confront the Negro signifies therefore a decisive step forward on the ^vay to manhood. In the meantime it has become noon, ^vhen the sun is at its highest, and consciousness has reached its greatest clarity. We might say that Henry's ego has continued to become more and more compact, that he has enhanced his capa- city consciously to make decisions. It is still winter, which may indicate a lack of feeling and wannth in Henry ; his psychic landscape is still ^vintry and apparently intellectually very cold. The foiu- friends are afraid that the naked Negro (being accustomed to a warm climate) might be frozen. But their fear turns out to be groundless, for after a long drive through de- serted snow-covered country they stop in a strange city and enter a dark house. This drive and the desolate country is symbolic of the long and wearisome search for self-development. A further complication a^vaits the four friends here. The Negro and his servant are mute. Therefore it is not possible to make verbal contact with them ; the four friends must seek other means to get in touch with the Negro. They cannot use intellectual means (words) but rather a feeling gesture to approach him. They offer him a present as one gives an offering to the gods, to rsdn their interest and their affection. And it has to be an object of our civilization, belonging to the values of the intellectual white man. Again a sacrificium intellectus is demanded to win the favor of the Negro, who represents nature and insdnct. Hemy is the first to make up his mind ^vhat to do. This is natural, since he is the bearer of the ego, whose proud consciousness (or hybris) has to be humbled. He picks up a box of matches from the floor and presents it "with deference" to the Negro. At first glance it may seem absurd that a small object lying on the floor and probably thro^vn arvay should be the proper gift, but this was the right choice. Matches are stored and controlled fire, a means by which a flame can be lit and pul out at any time. Fire and flame s)'mbolize warmth and love, feeling and passion; they are qualities of the heart, found rvhereverhuman beings exist. In giving the Negro such a present, Henry symbolically combines a highly developed civil- ized product of his conscious ego with the center of his onm primitivity and male strength, sjTnbolized by the Negro. In this ^vay, Henry can come into the full possession of his male sides, wth which lus ego must remain in con- stant touch from now on. This was the result. The six male persons -- the four friends, the Negro, and his servant -- are now together in a gay spirit at a communal meal. It is clear that here Henry's masculine totality has been rounded out. His ego seems to have found the security it needs to enable him consciously and freely to submit to the greater archetj'pal personality within himself, which foreshadows the emergence of the Self. What happened in the dream had its parallel also in Henry's waking life. Now he was sure of himself. Deciding quickly, he became serious about his engagement. Exactly nine months after his analysis had begun, he married in a little church of western Sivitzerland ; and he left the foUo'^ving day with his young wife for Canada to take up an appointment that he had received during the decisive weeks of his last dreams. Since then he has been li'ving an active, creative life as the head of a little family and holds an executive position in a great industry. Henry's case reveals, so to speak, an acceler- ated maturation to an independent and respon- sible manliness. It represents an initiation into the reality of outer life, a strengthening of the ego and of his masculinity, and wdth this a com- pletion of the first half of the individuation process. The second half -- ^tvhich is the estab- lishment of a right relationship beUveen the ego and the Self -- still lies ahead of Henry, in the second half of his life. Not ever)' case runs such a successful and stirring course, and not every case can be handled in a similar ^vay. On the contrary, every case is different. Not only do the young and the old, or the man and the woman, call for different treatment; so does every indi- vidual in all these categories. Even the same symbols require different interpretation in each case. I have selected this one because it repre- sents an especially impressive example of the autonomy of the unconscious processes and shows by its abimdance of images the untiring symbol-creating power of the psychic back- ground. It proves that the self-regulating action of the ps)'che (when not disturbed by too much rational explanation or dissection) can support the developmental process of the soul. InPsychologyandAlchemy Dr.Jung discusses a sequence ofover 1000 dreams produced byoneman.The sequence revealed a strikingnumber and variety ofrepresentations ofthe mandala motif -- which is so often linked with the realization ofthe Self (see pp. 213 ff.) .Thesepages present afewexamples ofmandala imageryfrom the dreams, to indicate the vastlydifferentforms in which this archetype can manifest itself, even in one individual's unconscious. The interpretative meanings offered here may, because oftheir brevity, seem tobe arbitrary assertions. In practice no Jungian would produce an interpretation of a dream without knowledge ofthedreamerand careful study ofhisassociationsto the dream.These interpretativestatements must betaken as hintstoward possible meanings -- nothing more. Left : In the dream the anima accuses the man of being inattentive to her. A clock says five minutes to the hour. The man is being "pestered" by his unconscious; the tension thus created is heightened by the clock, by waiting for something to happen in five minutes. Below :A skull (which the man tries in vain to kickaway) becomesa red ball,then a woman's head. Here theman may tryto rejectthe unconscious (kicking the skull), but it asserts itselfbymeans ofthe ball (perhaps alluding tothe sun) andthe anima figure. ! - Left: In partofa dream, a prince placesadiamond ring onthefourth fingerofthe dreamer's left hand. The ring,worn like awedding ring, indicates thatthedreamerhas taken a"vow"tothe Self. Below left :Aveiledwoman uncovers her face,which shines like the sun. The image implies an illumination ofthe unconscious (involving the anima) -- quite differentfrom conscious elucidation. Below : From atransparent sphere containing small spheres, a green plant grows.The sphere symbolizes unity; the plant, life and growth. Below :Troops, no longer preparing forwar,forman eight-rayed star and rotate to the left. TTiisimage ' perhaps indicates thatsome inner conflicthas givenwaytoharmony. Conclusion: M.-L. von Franz Science and the unconscious In the preceding chapters C. G. Jung and some of his associates have tried to make clear the role played by the symbol-creating function in man's unconscious psyche and to point out some fields of application in this newly discovered area of life. We are still far from understanding the unconscious or the archetypes -- those dyna- mic nuclei of the psyche -- in all their implica- tions. All we can see now is that the archetypes have an enormous impact on the individual, forming his emotions and his ethical and mental outlook, influencing his relationships with others, and thus affecting his whole destiny. We can also see that the arrangement of archetypal symbols follows a pattern of wholeness in the individual, and that an appropriate understand- ing of the symbols can have a healing effect. And we can see that the archetypes can act as creative or destructive forces in our mind : creative when they inspire new ideas, destruc- tive when these same ideas stiffen into con- scious prejudices that inhibit further discoveries. Jung has shown in his chapterhow subtle and differentiated all attempts at interpretation must be, in order not to weaken the specific individual and cultural values of archetypal ideas and sym- bols by leveling them out -- i.e., by giving them a stereotyped, intellectually formulated mean- ing. Jung himself dedicated his entire life tosuch investigations and interpretative work; natur- ally this book sketches only an infinitesimal part of his vast contribution to this new field of psychological discovery. He was a pioneer and remained fully aware that an enormous number of further questions remained unanswered and call for further investigation. This is why his concepts and hypotheses are conceived on as wide a basis as possible (without making them too vague and all-embracing) and why his views form a so-called "open system" that does not close the door against possible new discoveries. To Jung, his concepts were mere tools or heuristic hypotheses that might help us to ex- plore the vast new area of reality opened up by the discovery of the unconscious -- a discovery that has not merely widened our whole view of the world but has in fact doubled it. We must always ask now whether a mental phenomenon is conscious or unconscious and, also, whether a "real" outer phenomenon is perceived by con- scious or unconscious means. The powerful forces of the unconscious most certainly appear not only in clinical material but also in the mythological, religious, artistic, and all the other cultural activities by which man expresses himself. Obviously, if all men have common inherited patterns of emotional and mental behavior (which Jung called the archetypes), it is only to be expected that we shall find their products (symbolic fantasies, thoughts, and actions) in practically every field of human activity. Important modem investigations of many of these fields have been deeply influenced by Jung's work. For instance, this influence can be seen in the study of literature, in such books as J. B. Priestley's Literature and Western Man, Gottfried DieneFs Faust's Weg zu Helena, or James Kirsch's Shakespeare's Hamlet. Simi- larly, Jungian psychology has contributed to the study of art, as in the writings of Herbert Read or of Aniela Jaffe, Erich Neumann's examma- tion of Henry Moore, or Michael Tippett's studies in music. Arnold Toynbee's workon his- tory and Paul Radin's on anthropology have benefited from Jung's teachings, as have the contributions to sinology made by Richard Wil- helm, Enwin Rousselle, and Manfred Porkert. Sound waves, given off by a vibrating steel diskand made visible in a photograph, produce a strikingly mandala-like pattern. Of course, this does not mean that the special features of art and literature (including their interpretations) can be imderstood only from their archetypal foundation. These fields all have their own laws of activity; like all really creative achievements, they cannot ultimately be rationally explained. But vdthin their areas of action one can recognize the archetj'pal patterns as a dynamic background activity. And one can often decipher in them (as in dreams) the mes- sage of some seemingly purposive, evolutionary tendency of the unconscious. The fruitfulness of Jung's ideas is more imme- diately imderstandable within the area of the cultmal activities of man: Obviously, if the archetypes determine our mental behavior, they must appear in all these fields. But, unexpect- edly, Jung's concepts have also opened up new rvays of looking at things in the realm of the natural sciences as well -- ^for instance, in biology. The physicist Wolfgang Pauli has pointed out that, due to ne^v discoveries, our idea of the evolution of life requires a revision that might take into account an area of interrelation be- tts'een the unconscious psyche and biological processes. Until recently it ^vas assumed that the mutation of species happened at random and that a selection took place by means of which the "meaningful," well-adapted varieties sur- vived, and the others disappeared. But modem evolutionists have pointed out that the selections of such mutations by pine chance would have taken much longer than the knoivn age of our planet allows. Jung's concept of synchronicity may be help- ful here, for it could throw light upon the occur- rence of certain rare "border-phenomena," or exceptional events; thus it might explain how "meaningful" adaptations and mutations could happen in less time than that required by en- tirely random mutations. Today we know of many instances in which meaningful "chance" events have occurred when an archetype is acti- vated. For example, the history of science con- tains many cases of simultaneous invention or discovery. One of the mostfamous of such cases involved Darwin and his theory of the origin of species : Darwin had developed the theorym a lengthy essay, and in 1844 was busy expanding this into a major treatise. ^VhiIe he was at work on this project he received a manuscript from a young biologist, unknoisTi to Darwin, named A. R. Wallace. The manuscript was a shorter but othenvise parallel exposition of Daniin's theoiy'. At the time Wallace ivas in the Molucca Islands of the Malay Archipelago. He knew of Darwin as a naturalist, but had not the slightest idea of the kind of theoretical work on which Dansin was at the time engaged. In each case a creative scientist had inde- pendently arrived at a hypothesis that was to change the entire development of the science. And each had initially conceived of the hypo- thesis in an intuitive; "flash" (later backed up by documentary evidence). The archetypes thus seem to appear as the agents, so to speak, of a creatio continua. (AVhat Jung calls synchronistic events are in fact something like "acts of crea- tion in time.") Similar "meaningful coincidences" can be said to occur when there is a vital necessity for an individual to know about, say, a relative's death, or some lost possession. In a great many cases such information has been revealed by means of extrasensory perception. This seems to suggest that abnormal random phenomena may occurwhen a vital need or urge is aroused ; and this in turn might explain why a species of animals, under great pressure or in great need, could produce "meaningful" (but acausal) changes in its outermaterial structme. But the most promising field for future studies seems (as Jung saw it) to have unexpectedly opened up in connection ivith the complex field of microph)'sics. At first sight, it seems most un- likely thatwe should find a relationship betiveen psychology' and microphysics. The interrelation of these sciences is worth some explanation. The most obvious aspect of such a connection lies in the fact that most of the basic concepts of physics (such as space, time, matter, energy', continuum or field, particle, etc.) were origin- ally intuitive, semi-mythological, archetypal ideas of the old Greek philosophers -- ideas that then slowly evolved and became more accurate and that today are mainly expressed in abstract mathematical terms. The idea of a particle, for instance, was formulated by the fourth-century B.c. Greek philosopher Leucippus and his pupil Democritus, who called it the "atom" -- i.e., the "indivisible unit." Though the atom has not proved indivisible, we still conceive matter ulti- mately as consisting of w'aves and particles (or discontinuous "quanta"). The idea of energy, and its relationship to force and movement, was also formulated by early Greek thinkers, and was developed by Stoic philosophers. They postulated the exist- ence of a sort of life-giving "tension" (lonos), which supports and moves all things. This is obviously a semi-mythological germ of our modem concept of energy. Even comparatively modem scientists and thinkers have relied on half-mythological, archetypal images when building up new con- cepts. In the 17th century, for instance, the absolute validity of the law of causality seemed "proved" to Rene Descartes "by the fact that God is immutable in His decisions and actions." And the great German astronomer Johannes Kepler asserted that there are not more and not less than three dimensions of space on account of the Trinity. These are just two examples among many that show how even ourmoremodem and basic scientific concepts remained for a long time linked with archetypal ideas that originallycame from the unconscious. They do not necessarily express "objective" facts (or at least we cannot prove that they ultimately do) but spring from innate mental tendencies in man -- tendencies that induce him to find "satisfactory" rational explanatory connections bebveen the various outer and inner facts with which he has to deal. When examining nature and the universe, in- stead of looking for and finding objective quali- ties, "man encounters himself," in the phrase of the physicist Werner Heisenberg. Because of the implications of this point of \dew, Wolfgang Pauli and other scientists have begun to study the role of archetypal symbolism in the realm of scientific concepts. Pauli be- lieved that we should parallel our investigation of outer objects ^vith a psychological investiga- tion of the inner origin of our scientific con- cepts. (This investigation might shed new fight on a far-reaching concept to be introduced later in this chapter -- ^tbe concept of a "onemess" between the physical and psychological spheres, quantitative and qualitative aspects of reality. Besides this rather obvious fink between the psychology of the unconscious and physics, there are other even more fascinating connections. Jimg (working closely tvith Pauli) discovered that analytical ps^'chology has been forced by investigations in its own field to create concepts that turned out later to be strikingly similar to those created by the physicists ts'hen confronted with microphysical phenomena. One of the most important among the physicists' concepts is Niels Bohr's idea of complementarity. Modem microphysics has discovered that one can only describe fight by means of two logic- ally opposed but complementary concepts : The ideas of particle and ^vave. In grossly simplified terms, it might be said that under certain ex- perimental conditions fight manifests itself as if it \vere composed of particles ; under others, as TTie American physicist Mrs. Maria Mayer,who in 1963 shared the Nobel prize for physics. Her discovery -- concerning the constituents of the atomic nucleus -- was made like so many other scientific discoveries : in an intuitive flash of insight (sparked by a colleague's chance remark). Her theory indicates that the nucleus consists of concentric shells: The innermost contains two protons or two neutrons, the next contains eight of one or the other, and so on through what she calls the "magic numbers" -- 20, 28, 50, 82, 126. There is an obvious link between this model and the archetypes of the sphere and of numbers. 307 if it were a wave. Also, itwas discovered thatwe can accurately observe either the position or the velocity of a subatomic particle -- ^but not both at once. The observer must choose his experi- mental set-up, but by doing so he excludes (or rather must "sacrifice") some other possible set- up and its results. Furthermore, the measuring apparatus has to be included in the description of events because it has a decisive but uncontrol- lable influence upon the experimental set-up. Pauli says : "The science of microphysics, on account of the basic 'complementary' situation, is faced %vith the impossibility of eliminating the effects of the observer by determinable correc- tives and has therefore to abandon in principle any objective imderstanding of physical pheno- mena. Where classical physics still saw 'deter- mined causal natural laws of nature' we now look only for 'statistic la^vs' with 'primary pos- sibilities.' " In other words, in microphysics the observer interferes tvith the experiment in a way that can't be measured and that therefore can't be eliminated. No natural laws can be formulated, saying "such-and-such tvill happen in every case." All the microphysicist can say is "such- and-such is, according to statistical probability, likely to happen." This naturally represents a tremendous problem for our classical physical thinking. It requires a consideration, in a scien- tific experiment, of the mental outlook of the participant-observer : It could thus be said that scientists can no longer hope to describe any aspects or qualities of outer objects in a com- pletely independent, "objective" manner. Most modem physicists have accepted the fact that the role played by the conscious ideas of an observer in every microphysical experi- ment cannot be eliminated ; but they have not concerned themselves wth the possibility that the total psychological condition (both conscious and unconscious) of the observer might play a role as well. As Pauli points out, however, we have at least no a priori reasons for rejecting this possibility. Butwe must look at this as a still unanswered and an unexplored problem. Bohr's idea of complementarity is especially interesting to Jungian psychologists, for Jung saw that the relationship beUveen the conscious and unconscious mind also forms a complemen- tary pair of opposites. Each new content that comes up from the unconscious is altered in its basic nature by being partly integrated into the conscious mind of the observer. Even dream contents (if noticed at all) are in that way semi-conscious. And each enlargement of the observer's consciousness caused by dream inter- pretation has again an imnjeasurable repercus- sion and influence on the unconscious. Thus the unconscious can only be approximately de- scribed (like the particles of microphysics) by paradoxical concepts. What it really is "in itself" ^ve shall never know, just as we shall never know this about matter. To take the parallels between psychology and microphysics even further : What Jung calls the archetypes (or patterns of emotional and mental behavior in man) could just as weU be called, to use Pauli's term, "primary possibilities" of psychic reactions. As has been stressed in this book, there are no laws governing the specific form in which an archetype might appear. There are only "tendencies" (see p. 67) that, again, enable us to say only that such-and-such is likely to happen in certain psychological situations. As the American psychologist William James once pointed out, the idea of an unconscious could itself be compared to the "field" concept in physics. We might say that, just as in a mag- netic field the particles entering into it appear in a certain order, psychological contents also appear in an ordered way within that psychic area which we call the unconscious. If we call something "rational" or "meaningful" in our conscious mind, and accept it as a satisfactory "explanation" of things, it is probably due to the fact that our conscious explanation is in harmony with some preconscious constellation of contents in our unconscious. In other words, our conscious representations aresometimes ordered (or arranged in a pattern) before they have become conscious to us. The 18th-century German mathematician Karl Friedrich Gauss gives an example of an experi- ence of such an unconscious order of ideas : He saj's that he found a certain rule in the theory of numbers "not by painstaking research, but by the Grace of God, so to speak. The riddle solved itself as lightning strikes, and I myself could not tell or show the connection bebveen ^vhat I kne^v before, what I last used to experi- ment tsdth, and what produced the final suc- cess." The French scientist Henri Poincare is even more explicit about this phenomenon ; he describes how during a sleepless night he actu- ally watched his mathematical representations coUiding in him until some of them "found a more stable connection. One feels as if one could watch one's own unconscious at work, the unconscious activity partially becoming mani- fest to consciousness wthout losing its own character. At such moments one has an intui- tion of the difference behveen the mechanisms of the two egos." As a final example of parallel developments in microphysics and psychology, we can con- sider Jung's concept of meaning. 'Where before men looked for causal (i.e., rational) explana- tions of phenomena, Jung introduced the idea of looking for the meaning (or, perhaps we could say, the "purpose"). That is, rather than ask why something happened (i.e., ts'hat caused it), Jimg asked : What did it happen for? This same tendency appears in physics : Many modem phj'sicists are notv looking more for "coimections" in nature than for causal laws (determinism). Pauli expected that the idea of the uncon- scious would spread beyond the "narrow frame of therapeutic use" and would influence all natural sciences that deal with general life phenomena. Since Pauli suggested this develop*- ment he has been echoed by some physicistswho are concerned tvith the netv science of cj'beme- tics -- ^the comparative study of the "control" system formed by the brain and neirous sj'stem and such mechanical or electronic information and control systems as computers. In short, as the modem French scientist Oliver Costa de Beauregard has put it, science and ps)'cholog>' should in futm^ "enter into an active dialogue." The unexpected parallelisms of ideas in psj'chologj' and phj'sics suggest, as Jung pointed out, a possible ultimate one-ness of both fields of reality that physics and psychology study -- i.e., a psychophysical one-ness of all life phenomena. Jung was even convinced that what he ralk the unconscious somehow links up'%\ith the stracture of inorganic matter -- a link to which the problem of so-called "psychosomatic" ill- ness seems to point. The concept of a Unitarian idea of reality (which has been followed up by Pauli and Erich Neumaim) was called by Jung the units mundus (the one world, r\ithin ^vhich matter and psj'che are not yet discriminated or separately actualized). He paved the ^vay to- ward such a Unitarian point of view by pointing out that an archet^'pe shors's a "psychoid" (i.e., not purely psy'chic but almost material) aspect when it appears ^\ithin a symchronistic event -- for such an event is in effect a meaningful arrangement of irmer ps)'chic and outer facts. In other rs'ords, the archetypes not only fit into outer situations (as animal patterns of be- ha\ior fit into their surrounding nature); at bottom they tend to become manifest in a sjn- chronistic "arrangement" that includes both matter and ps)'che. But these statements are just hints at some directions in which the investiga- tion of life phenomena might proceed. Jung felt that tve should first leam a great deal more about the interrelation of these ttvo areas (mat- ter and ps)'che) before rushing into too many abstract speculations about it. The field thatJung himself felt wouldbe most fruitful for further investigations was the study of our basic mathematical axiomata -- ^which Pauli calk "primary mathematical intuitions," and among ^vhich he especially mentions the ideas of an infinite series of munbers in arith- metic, or of a continuum in geometry, etc. As the Gennan-bom author Hannah Arendt has said, "with the rise of modernity, mathematics do not simply enlarge their content or reach out into the infinite to become applicable to the immensity of an infinite and infinitely growing, expanding universe, but cease to be concerned with appearance at all. They are no longer the beginnings of philosophy, or the science of Being in its true appearance, but become instead the science of the structure of the human mind." (A Jungian would at once add the question : Which mind ? The conscious or the unconscious mind?) As we have seen with reference to the experiences of Gauss and Poincare, the mathe- maticians also discovered the fact that our representations are "ordered" before we become aware of them. B. L. van der Waerden, who cites many examples of essential mathematical insights arisingfrom theunconscious, concludes : ". . . the unconscious is not only able to associate and combine, but even to judge. The judgment of the unconscious is an intuitive one, but it is under favorable circumstances completely sure." Among the many mathematical primary in- tuitions, or a priori ideas, the "natural num- bers" seem psychologically the most interesting. Not only do they serve our conscious everyday measuring and counting operations; they have for centuries been the only existing means for "reading" the meaning of such ancient forms of divination as astrology, numerology, geomancy, etc. -- all of which are based on arithmetical computation and all of which have been inves- tigated by Jung in terms of his theory of syn- chronicity. Furthermore, the natural numbers -- viewed from a psychological angle -- must cer- tainly be archetypal representations, for we are forced to think about them in certain definite ways. Nobody, for instance, can deny that 2 is the only existing even primary number, even if he has never thought about it consciously before. In other words, numbers are not con- cepts consciously invented by men for purposes of calculation : They are spontaneous and autonomous products of the unconscious -- as are other archetypal symbols. But the natural numbers are also qualities adherent to outer objects : We can assert and count that there are two stones here or three trees there. Even if we strip outer objects of all such qualities as color, temperature, size, etc., there still remains their "manyness" or special multiplicity. Yet these same numbers are also just as indisputably parts of our own mental set-up -- abstract concepts that we can study without looking at outer objects. Numbers thus appear to be a tangible connection between the spheres of matter and psyche. According to hints dropped by Jung, it is here that the most fruit- ful field of further investigation might be found. I mention these rather difficult concepts briefly in order to show that, to me, Jung's ideas do not form a "doctrine" but are the beginning of a new outlook that will continue to evolve and expand. I hope they will give the reader a glimpse into what seems to me to have been essential to and typical of Jung's scientific atti- tude. He was always searching, with unusual freedom from conventional prejudices, and at the same time with great modesty and accuracy, to understand the phenomenon of life. He did not go further into the ideas mentioned above, because he felt that he had not yet enough facts in hand to say anything relevant about them -- ^just as he generally waited several years before publishing his new insights, checking them again and again in the meantime, and himself raising every possible doubt about them. Therefore, what might at first sight strike the reader as a certain vagueness in his ideas comes in fact from this scientific attitude of intellectual modesty -- an attitude that does not exclude (by rash, superficial pseudo-explanations and over- simplifications) new possible discoveries, and that respects the complexity of the phenomenon of life. For this phenomenon was always an exciting mystery to Jung. It was never, as it is for people with closed minds, an "explained" reality about which it can be assumed that we know everything. Creative ideas, in my opinion, show their value in that, like keys, they help to "unlock" hitherto unintelligible connections of facts and thus enable man to penetrate deeper into the mystery of life. I am convinced that Jung's ideas can serve in this way to find and interpret new facts in many fields of science (and also of everyday life), simultaneously leading the indi- vidual to a more balanced, more ethical, and wider conscious outlook. If the reader should feel stimulated to work further on the investi- gation and assimilation of the unconscious -- which always begins by working on oneself -- the purpose of this introductory book would be fulfilled. Notes Approaching the nnconscioas C. G.Jung page37 Nietzsche's crjptomnesia is disctissed inJung's "On the Psj'chologj' of So-called Occult Phenomena,'' in CollectedWorksvol. I.The relevantpassagefrom the ship'slogand thecorrespondingpassagefromNietzsche are as foilOSS's: FromJ.Kemcr, Blatteram Prevorst, vol. IV, p. 57, headed"An Extract ofAwe-inspiring Import..." (orig. 1831-37) : "The fourcaptainsandamerchant, Mr. Bell, sventashoreon the islandofMount Stromboli toshoot rabbits.At three o'clock theymustered thecrew togo aboard, svhen, to their inexpressible astonishment, they sass'twomen fl)'ingrapidly tosvardthem through the air. Onesvas dressed in black, the otherin grey.Theycame pastthemvery closely, in greatest haste, and to their utmostdismay descended into the craterofthe terrible volcano.MountStromboli.Thej'recognized the pair as acquaintancesfromLondon." From F. Nietzsche, ThmSpake l^araikmlra, chapter xl, "GreatEvents" (translated byCommon, p. 180, slighdy modified), orig. 1883 :"Now about the time that Zara- thustrasojournedon theHappy Isles, ithappened that ashipanchored atthe isleonwhich thesmokingmoun- tain stands,and thecrew ss'entashore toshoot rabbits. About thenoon-tidehour, however,when the captain and hismen \serc together again, thej'suddenlysawa mancomingtoward them through the air,andavoice said distinctly: 'It is time! It is highest time!' Butsvhen the figuredrew close to them, fijang past quicklylikeashadow in thedirecdon ofthevolcano, theyrecognizedwith the greatestdismay that itwas Zarathustra . . . 'Behold,' said the oldhelmsman, 'Zara- thustragoesdown to heU!' " 38 Robert Louis Stes'enson discusses hisdream of JekyllandHyde in"A Chapteron Dreams" from his Across thePlain. 56 Amore detailedaccount ofjung'sdream is given in Memories, Dreams, ReflectionsofC. G.Jtmg, ed. Aniela Jafiii,NewYork, Pantheon, 1962. 63 Examplesofthe stateofsubliminal ideasand images can befound in PierreJanet's svorks. 93 Furtherexamples ofcultural symbols appear in Mircea Eliade'sDerSchamanismm, Zurich, 1947. Sec alsoThe CollectedWorks ofCarl G.Jung, vols. I-XVIII ; London, Routlcdge&Kegan Paul;NewYork, Bollingen-Pantheon. ' • Ancientmythsandmodernman JosephL.Henderson 108 Concerningthe finalityofChrist's resurrecdon: Christianity isan eschatological religion, meaning it hasa finalend in s'iew thatbecomes sj'nonjmous svith theLastJudgment. Otherreligions, inwhich matriar- chalelements oftribal culture arc preserved (e.g., Orphism), are c>'clical, asdemonstratedby Eliades in TheMythoftheEternal Return,NewYork,^Uingen- Pantheon, 1954. 112 SeePaul Radin, Hero Cyclesofthe Winnebago, Indiana UniversityPublicadons, 1948. 113 ConcerningHare, Dr. Rodin remarks: "Hare is the t>picalhero asweknowhim from allover theworld, civilizedand pre-literate,andfrom the most remote periodsofworld history." 114 ThetwinNavahowarriorgods are discussedby MaudOakesin Where the TtvoCame to theirFather,A Hacoho Il'arCrrrTTwmc/, BoUingen,NewYork, 1943. 117 Jung disctisses Trickster in"On thePsychology oftheTricksterFigure," CollectedWorks vol. IX. 118 The ego's conflict -svith theshadow is discussed in Jung's"TheBatde forDeliverancefrom the Mother," CollectedWorks vol.V. 125 ForaninterpretadonoftheMinotaurmyth, see Mary Renault'snovel TheKingMustDie,Possthoan, 1958. 125 Thesymbolismofthe labyrinth is discussedby EnchNeumann in The OriginsandHistoryofConsciom~ ness, BoUingen, 1954. 126 FortheNavahomyth ofCoyote, see Margaret Sches-ill LinkandJ. L. Henderson, ThePollen Path, Stanford, 1954. 128 Theemergence oftheego is discussedby Erich Neumann, op. cit.; MichaelFordham, jVew Decelopments in AnalyticalPgrchology,London, Roudedge& Kegan Paul, 1957 ; andEstherM. Harding, The Restoration ofthe InjuredArchetypalImage (privately circulated), NetvYork, 1960. 129 Jung'sstudyofinidad6nappearsin"Anal)tical Psychologyand the Weltanschauung," CollectedWorks vol. \TII. See alsoArnoldvanGeimep, TheRitesof Passage, Chicago, 1961. 132 Women's trials ofstrength are discussedby Erich KawmanninAmorandPsyche, BoUingen, 1956. 137 The talcof"Beaut)'and the Beast" appears inMme. LeprincedcBeamnont's TheFairy TaleBook,NewYork, Simon& Schuster, 1958. 141 Themyth ofOrpheus can befound inJane E. Harrison's Prolegomrus to the StudyofGreek Religion, Cambridge University Press, 1922. See alsoW. K. C. Guthrie, OrpheusandGreek Religion, Cambridge, 1935. 142 Jung's discussion ofthe Catholic ritualofthe chalice is in "Transformadon S>'mbolism in the Mass," CollectedWorks vol. XI. See alsoAlan IVatts,Myth andRitual in Christianity, Vanguard Press, 1953. 145 Linda Fierz-David's interpretation ofOrphic ritual appears in PsychologischeBetrachtungenzu der Freskenfotge der Ijlla dei Misteri in Pompeji ein Versuch von LindaFiere-Darid, trans. Glad>'S Phelan (privately printed), Zurich, 1957. 148 TTieRoman funeralum from the Esquiline Hill is discussedbyJane Harrison, op. cit. 149 SecJung's"TheTranscendentFunction," editedby the Students'Assodadon, C.G.Jimglnsdtute, Zurich. 151 Joseph Campbell discussestheshaman asbird in TheSymbol without Meaning, Zurich, Rhein-Verlag, 1958. 152 ForT. S. Eliot's "The IVasteLand," see his CollectedPoems, London, Faberand Faber, 1963. Theprocessofindivxdaation M.-L.vonFranz 160 A detailed discussionofthemeanderingpattern of dreams appears inJung's Collected Works vol. VIII, p. 23 ff. and pp. 237-300 (especiallyp. 290). Foran e-xample seeJung's CollectedIVorks vol. XII, part 1 . See alsoGerhardAdler, Studies in AnalyticalPsychology, London, 1948. 161 Forjung's discussionofthe Self, see Collected Works vol. IX, part 2, pp. 5 ff., 23 ff.; and vol. XII, pp. 18f.,41f.,174,193. 161 The Naskapi are describedby Frard:G. Speckin A'askapi: The SavageHunteroftheLabradorPeninstda, UniversityofOklahoma Press, 1935. 162 The concept ofps>'chicwholeness is discussedin Jung's CollectedWorks vol.XIV, p. 117, and in s'ol. IX, part 2, p. 6, 190. See also CollectedWorks vol. IX,partl,pp. 275ff.,290ff. 163 Thestoryoftheoak tree is translatedfrom Richard'Wilhelm, Dschuang-Dsi;Das wahreBuckcom sudlichenBlulendland,Jesia 1923, pp. 33-4. Jung dealswith the tree as asymbol ofthe indiv- iduation process in "Der philosophischeBaum," Von den Wurzeln desBeumsteins, Zurich, 1954 (notyet translated). 163 The "localgod" towhom sacrificesweremadeon the stone earth-altar corresponds inmanyrespects to theantiquegenius loci. SeeHenri Maspdro, La Chine antique, Paris, 1955, p. 140 f. (Thisinformation isowed to the kindness ofMissArianeRump.) 164 Jung notes the difficulty ofdescribing the individ- uation process in CollectedWorks vol. XVII, p. 179. 165 This briefdescription oftheimportance of children's dreams derives mostlyfromJung's Psychol- ogicalInterpretation ofChildren'sDreams (notesand lectures), E. T. H. Zurich, 1938-39 (private circulation only). The special example comesfrom animtranslated seminar, Psychologische Interpretation von Kindertraumen, 1939-40, p. 76 ff. See alsoJung's"The Developmentof Personality," CollectedWorks vol. XVII; Michael Fordham, The Life ofChildhood, London, 1944 (especially p. 104) ; ErichNeumann, The OriginsandHistoryof Consciousness; Frances Wickes, TheInner Worldof Consciousness,NewYork-London, 1927; and Eleanor Bertine, Human Relationships, London, 1958. 166 Jimg discusses the psychicnucleus in"The Develop- ment ofPersonality," CollectedWorks vol. XVII, p. 175, and vol. XIV, p. 9 ff. 167 For fairy talepatterns corresponding to the sick king motif, seeJoh. Bolteand G. Polivka, Anmerkungen zu den Kinder- undHausmarchen der Briider Grimm, vol. I, 1913-32, p. 503 ff. -- ^i.e., all variations toGrimm's tale The Golden Bird. 168 Further discussion oftheshadowcan befound in Jung's CollectedWorks vol. IX, part 2, chapter 2, and vol. XII, p. 29 f., and idem: The UndiscoveredSelf , London, 1958, pp. 8-9. See alsoFrances Wickes, The Inner WorldofMan,NewYork-Toronto, 1938. Agoodexample ofshadowrealization is given in G. Schmalz, Komplexe PsychologicundKSrplichesSymptom, Stuttgart, 1955. 170 Examples ofthe Egyptianconcept oftheunder- worldappear in The Tomb ofRameses VI, Bollingen seriesXL, parts 1 and 2, Pantheon Books, 1954. 172 Jung dealswith thenature ofprojection in CollectedWorks, vol. VI, Definitions, p. 582; and CollectedWorks vol. VIII, p. 272 ff. TheKoran (Qur'an) has been translatedby E. H. Palmer, Oxford University Press, 1949. See also Jung's interpretation ofthe story ofMoses and Khidr in CollectedWorks vol. IX, p. 135 ff. 175 The Indian story^omaAra; Vetalapanchavimsati hasbeen translatedby G.H.Tawney,Jaico-book, Bombay, 1956. See alsoHenryZimmer's excellent psychological interpretation TheKingand the Corpse, Bollingen series XI,NewYork, Pantheon, 1948. 176 The reference to theZen master isfromDer Ochs undsein Hirte (trans. byK6ichiTsujimura), Pfullingen, 1958, p. 95. 177 Forfurther discussion ofthe anima, seeJvmg's CollectedWorks vol. IX, part 2, pp. 11-12, and chapter 3; vol.XVII p. 198 f.; vol. VIII, p. 345; vol. XI, pp. 29-31, 41 f., 476, etc. ; vol. XII, Part 1. See alsoEmmaJimg, Animus andAnima, Two Essays,The Analytical Club ofNewYork, 1957 ; Eleanor Bertine, Human Relationships, part2 ; EstherHarding, P^chic Energy,NewYork, 1948, passim.,and others. 177 Eskimoshamanismhas been describedbyMircea Eliade inDerSchamanismus, Zurich, 1947, especially p. 49 ff. ; andbyKnudRasmussen in Thulefahrt, FranMurt, 1926, passim. 178 The Siberianhunterstory isfrom Rasmussen, Die Gabe desAdlers,VTaxMyiit3M.,\920, p. 172. 179 A discussion ofthe "poison damsel" appears inW. Hertz, DieSagevom Giftmadchen, Abh. der k. bayr.Akad. der Wiss., 1 Cl.XX Bd. 1 Abt. Mflnchen, 1893. 179 Themurderous princess is discussedby Chr.Hahn in GriechischeundAlbanesischeMdrchen, vol. 1, Munchen- Berlin, 1918, p. 301 : DerJagerund der Spiegel der alles sieht. 180 "Lovemadness" causedbyan anima projection is examinedinEleanor Bertine'sHuman Relationships, p. 113 sq. See alsoDr. H. Strauss' excellentpaper "DieAnima als Projections-erlebnis," unpublished ms,, Heidelberg, 1959. 180 Jung discusses the possibilityofpsychic integra- tion through anegativeanima in Collected Works, vol. XI, p. 164 ff. ; vol. IX, p. 224 sq. ; vol. XII, pp. 25 sq., 110 sq., 128. 185 For the four stages oftheanima, seeJung's CollectedWorks vol. XVI, p. 174. 186 Francesco Colonna's Hypnerotomachia hasbeen interpretedby Linda Fierz-David inDerLiebestraum des Poliphilo, Zmich, 1947. 186 The quotation describing the role ofthe anima is from Aurora Consurgens I, translatedby E. A. Glover (English translation in preparation). German edition by M.-L. von Franz, inJung's Mysterium Coniunctionis, vol. 3, 1958. 187 Junghasexamined theknightly cult ofthelady in CollectedWorks vol. VI, p. 274and 290 sq. See alsoEmmaJung and M.-L. von Franz, Die Graalslegende inp^chologischer Sicht, Zurich, 1960. 189 For the animus' appearance as a "sacred convic- tion," SeeJung's Two Essays in AnalyticalP^chology, London, 1928, p. 127 ff. ; CollectedWorks vol. IX, chapter 3. See alsoEmmaJung, AnimusandAnima, passim. ; EstherHarding, Woman's Mysteries,NewYork, 1955; Eleanor Bertine,Human Relationships, p. 128 ff. ; Toni Wolff, Studien zu C. G.Jung'sPychologie, Zurich, 1959, p. 257 ff. ; ErichNeumann, ,^urPgichologie des Weiblichen, Zurich, 1953. 189 Thegypsy fairy talecanbefound inDer Tod als Geliebter, Zigeuner-Marchen. DieMarchen der Welt- literatur, ed. F.von der Leyen and P. Zaunert,Jena, 1926, p. 117sq. 194 Theanimus as provider ofvaluable masculine qualities is dealtwith byJungin Collected Works vol. IX, p. 182 sq., andidem : Two Essays, Chapter 4. 196 Forthe Austrian tale ofthe black princess, see "Dieschwarze Konigstochter," Marchen ausdemDonau- lande. DieMarchen der Weltliteratur,Jenn, 1926, p. 150 sq. 196 TheEskimo tale oftheMoon Spirit isfrom"Von einerFrau die surSpinnewurde," translatedfromK. Rasmussen, Die Gabe des Adlers, p. 12 1 sq. 196 A discussion ofthe Self'syoung-old personifica- tions appears inJung's CollectedWorks vol. IX, p. 151 sq. 200 Themyth ofP'anKucan befound inDonaldA. MacKenzie'sMythsofChinaandJapan, London, p. 260, and in H. Maspdro'sLe Taoisme, Paris, 1950, p. 109. See alsoJ.J. M. de Groot, Universismus, Berlin, 1918, pp. 130-31 ;H. Koestler, Symbolik des Chinesischen Univer- sismus, Stuttgart, 1958, p. 40; andJung's Mysterium Coniunctionis, vol. 2, pp. 160-61. 200 For discussion ofAdam as CosmicMan, seeAugust WUnsche, SchBpfungundSundenfall des ersten Menschen, Leipzig, 1906, pp. 8-9and p. 13 ;Hans Leisegang,Die Gnosis, Leipzig, KronerscheTaschcnansgabe. For the ps>-chological interpretation see Jung's Mysterium Comimctionis, vol. 2, Chapter 5, pp. 140-99; and CollectedWorks vol. XII, p. 346 sq.Theremay alsobehistoricalconnectionsbetween the Chinese P'an Ku, thePersianGayomart, and thelegends ofAdam; see Sven S.Hartmann, Gayomart, Uppsala, 1953, pp. 46, 115. 202 The conceptofAdam as "super-soul," comingfrom adatepalm, is dealt ssith by E. S. Drower in The Secret Adam,A StudyofJfasoraean Gnosis, Oxford, 1960, pp. 23, 26,27,37. . 202 The quotationfrom Meister Eckhardt isfrom F. Pfeiffer's MeisterEckhardt, trans. G.de B. Evans, London, 1924, vol. II, p. 80. 202 ForJung's discussions ofCosmicMan, see CollectedWorks vol. IX, part 2, p. 36 sq. ; "Answer toJob," CollectedWorksvol. XI,and Mysterium Coniunctionis, vol. 2, p.215 sq. See also EstherHarding, into Self, Ixjndon, 1956, passim. 202 AdamKadmon is discussed in Gershom Sholem's Major Trends inJeuiish Mysticism, 1941; andJung's Mysterium Coniunctionis, vol. 2, p. 182 sq. 201 Thesymbol ofthe royal couple isexamined in Jung's CollectedWorks vol.XVI, p. 313, and in Mysterium Coniunctionis, vol. 1, pp. 143, 179; vol. 2, pp. 86, 90, 140, 285. See also Plato's Symposium, and the GnosticGod-man, theAnthropos figure. 205 For thestone asasymbolofthe Self, seeJung's Von den Wurzeln desBewussteins, Zurich, 1954, pp. 200 sq., 415 sq., and449 sq. (not yet translated). 206 Thepointwhen the urge to individuate is consciously realized is discussed inJung's Collected Worksvol. XII, passim.; Vonden Wurzelndes Bevoussteins, p. 200 sq.; CollectedWorks vol. IX, part 2, pp. 139 sq., 236, 247 sq., 268; Collected \Vorks vol.XVI, p. 164 sq. See also CollectedWorks vol.VIH, p. 253 sq. ;andToni Wolff, Studien zu C, G.Jung'sP^ehologie, p. 43. See also, essentially,Jung's Mysterium Coniunctionis, vol. 2, p. 318sq. 207 Foranextended discussion of"activeimagination," seeJung's"TheTranscendent Function," in Collected Works vol.VIH. 207 The zoologistAdolfPortman describes animal "insvardness" inDas Tier als soziales Wesen, Zurich, 1953, p. 366. 209 AncientGerman beliefr concerning tombstonesare discussedin PaulHerrmann'sDasaltgermanische Priester- itwm,Jena, 1929, p. 52; and in Jung's Von den JVurzeln desBewusstseins,p. 198 sq. 210 Morienus's description ofthe philosophers' stone is quotedinJung's CollectedWorks vol. XII, p. 300, note 45. 210 That suffering is necessary to find thestone is an alchemicaldictum; compareJung's CollectedWorks vol. XII, p. 280 sq. 210 Jung discusses the relationship between psycheand matterin Two Essayson AnalyticalPsychology, pp. 142-46. 211 For a fullexplanation ofsynchronicity, seeJung's "Synchronicity: an Acausal Connecting Principle," in CollectedWorks vol. VIII, p. 419 sq. 212 ForJung'sviesvson tiiming to Eastern religion m order to contact theunconscious, see "Concerning MandalaSymbolism," CollectedWorks vol. IX, part 1, p. 335 sq.,andvol. XII, p. 212 sq. (Ofthe latter, see alsopp. 19,42, 91 sq., 101, 119sq., 159, 162.) 212 Theexcerptfrom the Chinese text isfromLuK'uan TS, Charles Luk, Ch'an andZen Teaching, London, p. 27. 216 The taleoftheBathBadgerd isfromMarchen aus Iran, DieMarchen der Weltliteratur,Jena, 1959, p. 150 sq. 217 Jungexamines themodem feeling ofbeinga "statis- tical cipher" in The UndiscoveredSelf , pp. 14, 109. 220 Dream interpretation on the subjective level is discussed inJung's CollectedWorksvol.XVI, p. 243 and vol.VIH, p. 266. ' 220 Thatman is instinctively"intune" with his sur- roundings is discussedbyA. Portmann inDas TieraU soziales Wesen, p. 65 sq. and passim. See alsoN. Tinbergen, A StudyofInstinct, Oxford, 1955, pp. 151 sq.and 207 sq. 221 El. E. E. Hartley discusses themass unconscious inFundamentalsofSocialPsychology,NewYork, 1952. See alsoTh.JansvitzandR. Schulze,MueRichtungen in derMasserrkommrmikationforschung,RimdfunkimdFera- sehen, 1960, pp. 7, 8and passim. Also, ibid. pp. 1-20,and Unterschwellige Kommunikation, ibid., 1960, Heft 3/4, p. 283 and p. 306. (Thisinformation is ossed to thekindness ofMr. Ren6 Malamoud.) 224 Thevalue offreedom (to createsomething useful) is stressedbyJung in The UruliscoveredSelf, p. 9. 224 For religious figures thatsymbolize the individua- tion process, seeJung's CollectedAVorks vol. XI, p. 273and passim,and ibid.. Part2 andp. 164 sq. 225 Jung discusses religioussymbolism inmodem dreams in CollectedWorks vol.XH, p. 92. Sec also ibid., pp. 28, 169 sq., 207, and others. 225 The addition ofa fourth element totheTrinity is examined byJimg in Mysterium Coniunctionis, vol. 2, pp. 112sq., 117sq., 123 sq. (not yet translated), and Collected Works vol. VIII, p. 136 sq. and 160-62. 228 The vision ofBlackHk is from BlackElkSpeaks, ed.John G. Neihardt,New York, 1932. German edition: SchwarzerHirsch : Ich rufe mein Fo/i, Olten, 1955. 228 ThestoryoftheEskimo eagle festival is from Knud Rasmussen, Die Gabe des Adlers, pp. 23 sq., 29 sq. 228 Jung discusses thereshaping oforiginalmythological material in CollectedWorks vol. XI, p. 20 sq., and vol. XII, Introduction. 229 The physicistAV. Pauli has described the effects ofmodem scientific discoveries, like Heisenberg's, in Die PhilosophischeBedeutung der Idee derKomple- mentaritat, "Experientia," vol. \T/2, p. 72 sq. ; and in IVahrscheinlichkeit undPhysik "Dialectica," vol. VHI/2, 1954, p. 117. Symbolisminthevisnalarts AnielaJa£f6 234 Max Ernst'sstatement is quoted in C. Giedion- Welckes, Contemporary Sculpture,NewYork, 1955. 234 HerbertKuhn's examinationofprehistoric art is in hisDieFelsbilderEuropas, Stuttgart, 1952. 236 Concerning theNo drama, compareD. Seckel, Einfuhrung in die Kunst Ostasiens, Munidi, 1960, figs, leand 16. For thefox-maskusedinNodrama, see G. Buschan, Tiere in KultundAberglauben, Ciba Journal, Basle, Nov. 1942, no. 86. 237 For the animal attributesofvarious gods, see G. Buschan, op. cit. 238 Jung discusses thesymbolism oftheunicorn (one symbol ofChrist) in Collected AVorks, vol.XH, p. 415 ff. 240 For them)^ofBrahma, seeH.Zimmer, Maya, der indischeMythos, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1936. 240 The birth ofBuddhaappears in the Sanskrit Lalita Vistera, c. a.d. 600 to 1000; trans. Paris, 1884. 240 Jung discusses the fourfunctions ofconsciousness in Collected AVorks, vol. VI. 240 Tibetan mandalas are discussedand interpretedin Jung's CollectedWorks, vol. IX. 242 The picture oftheVirgin in the centerofa circular tree is the centralpanelofthe Triptyquedu Buisson Ardent, 1476, Cathedrale Saint-Saveur, Aix-en-Provence. 242 Examples ofsacred buildingswithmandala ground-plans: Borobudur,Java; theTaj Mahal; the OmarMosque inJerusalem. Secular buildings: Castel del Monte, builtby theHolyRoman Emperor Frederick II (1194-1250) in Apulia. 242 For themandala in the foundation ofprimitive villagesand sacred places, seeM. Eliade,Das Heilige unddas Profane, Hamburg, 1957. 242 The theory that quadratameans "quadripartite" was proposed by FranzAltheim, the Berlin classical scholar. See K. Kerenyi, Introduction to Kerenyi-Jung, Einfiihrung in das Wesen der Mythologie, Zurich, p. 20. 242 The other theory, that the urbs quadrata referred to squaring the circle, isfrom Kerenyi, loc. cit. 243 For theHeavenly City, see Book ofRevelations,XXL 243 The quotationfromJung isfrom his Commentary on the Secret ofthe Golden Flower, London-NewYork, 1956, 10th edition. 243 Examples ofthe equilateral cross : cruciHxion from the Evangelienharmonie, Vienna, Nat. Bib. Cod. 2687 (Otfried von Weissenberg, ninth century) ; Gosforth cross, 10th century; the Monasterboice Cross, 10th century; or theRuthwell cross. 245 The discussion ofthechange in ecclesiastical building is based on information in Karl Litz's essay DieMandala , ein Beispiel derArchiteklursymbolik, Winterthur, November 1960. 247 Matisse's Still Life ... is in theThompson Collection, Pittsburgh. 247 Kandinsky's painting containing loose colored balls or circles is entitled Blurred White, 1927, and is in the Thompson collection. 247 Paul Nash's on theDowns is in Mrs. C. Neilson's collection. See GeorgeW. Digby, Meaningand Symbol, Faber& Faber, London. 249 Jung's discussion ofUFOs is in Flying Saucers ; A ModernMyth ofThings Seen in the Skies, London- NewYork, 1959. 250 The quotationfrom Bazaine's Notes sur lapeinture d'aujourd'hui (Paris, 1953) was quoted inWalter Hess, Dokumente zum Verstandnis dermodemen Malerei, Hamburg, 1958 (Rowohlt), p. 122.Anumber of quotations in this chapterhave been takenfrom this extremelyuseful compilation, which will be referred to hereafter as Dokumente. 250 Franz Marc's statement isfrom Briefe, Aufzeichnungen undAphorismen, Berlin, 1920. 250 ForKandinsky's book, see sixth edition, Berne, 1959. (First editionMunich 1912.) Dokumente, p. 80. 250 Mannerismandmodishness inmodem art is discussed byWemerHaftmann in Glanz undGefahrdung derAbstrakten Malerei, in Skizzenbuch zurKultur der Gegenwart, Munich, 1960, p. 111. See alsoHaftmann's Die Malerei im. 20. Jahrhundert, second ed., Munich, 1957 ; andHerbertRead,A Concise History ofModem Painting, London, 1959, andnumerous individual studies. 251 Kandinsky's essay"Uber dieFormfrage" is in Der blaue Reiter, Munich, 1912. See Dokumente, p. 87. Bazaine'scomments onDuchamp's bottlerack are iromDokumente, p. 122. 253 Joan Mird's statement isboraJoan Mird, Horizont Collection, Arche Press. 254 The reference to Schwitters' "obsession" is from WernerHaftmann, op. cit. Kandinsky's statement is from Selbstbetrachtungen, Berlin, 1913. Dokumente, p. 89. 254 The quotationfrom Carlo Carrk isfromW. Haftmarm's PaulKlee, Wege bildnerischen Denkens, Munich 1955, third edn., p. 71. ' 254 ThestatementbyKlee isfrom Wege des Naturstudiums, Weimar, Munich, 1923. Dokumente, p. 125. 254 Bazaine'sremark isfromNotes sur lapeinture d'aujourd'Hui, Paris, 1953. Dokumente,p. 125. 254 The statementbyde Chirico isfrom Sull'Arte Metajisica, Rome, 1919. Dokumente, p. 112. 255 The quotationsfromde Chirico's Memorie dellamia Vita are in Dokumente, p. 1 12. Kandinsky's statementabout the death ofGod is in his Ueberdas Geistige in derKunst, op. cit. 255 Ofthe 19th-centuryEuropean poets alluded to, see especiallyHeinrich Heine,Jean Paul, Rimbaud, and Mallarmd. 255 The quotationfromJung isfrom CollectedWorks, vol. XI, p. 88. Artists inwhosework manichiniappearinclude Carlo Carr^, A. Archipenko (b. 1887), and Giorgio Morandi (b. 1880). 257 Thecommenton ChagallbyHerbertRead isfrom hisA Concise HistoryofModem Painting, London, 1959, p. 128, 124, 126. 257 Andrd Breton's statements are from Manifestesdu Surrealisme 1924-42, Paris, 1946. Dokumente, p. 117, 118. 258 The quotationfrom Ernst'sBiyondPainting(New York, 1948) is in Dokumente, p. 1 19. 259 References toHansArp are based on Carola Giedion-Welcker, Lfani.4r/), 1957,p. xvi. 259 Reference to Ernst's "Histoire Naturelle" is in Dokumente, p. 121. 260 On the 19th-centuryRomanticsand "nature's handwriting," seeNovalis, Die Lehrlinge zu Sais; E. T. A. Hoffmann,DasMarchen vom Goldnen Topf; G.H.von Schubert, Symbolik des Traumes. 260 Kassner'scommenton GeorgeTrakl isfrom Almanack de la LibrairieFlinker, Paris, 1961. Kandinsky's statements are, respectively, from Ruckblicke (quoted fromMax Bill's Introduction to Kandinsky's Ueberdas Geistige . . . ,op. cit.) ; from Selbstdarstellung, Berlin, 1913 (Dokumente, p. 86); and fromHaftmann, Malerei im. 20.Jahrhundert, Franz Marc's statements are respectivelyfrom Briefe, Aufzeichnungen undAphorismen, op. cit. ; Dokumente, p. 79 f.; andfromHaftmann, l.c., p. 478. 262 Klee's statement isfrom Ueberdiemodeme Kunst, Lecture, 1924. Dokumente, p. 84. 262 Mondrian's statement isfromNeue Gestaltung, Munich, 1925; Dokumente, p. 100. 263 Kandinsky's statements are respectivelyfrom Ueber das Geistige . . . ,op. cit., p. 83 ; from Ueber die Formfrage, Munich, 1912 (Dokumente, p. 88) ; from Ueber das Geistige (Dokumente, p. 88) ; andfrom Aufsatze, 192343 (Dokumente, p. 91). Franz Marc's statement isquotedfrom Georg Schmidt, Vom Sinn derParalleleinKunst undNaturform, Basle, 1960. 263 Klee's statements are respectivelyfrom Ueber die Modeme Kunst, op. cit. (Dokumente, p. 84) ; Tagebucher, Berlin, 1953 (Dokumente, p. 86) ; quotedfromHaftmann, Paul Klee, l.e., p. 93and p. 50; Tagebucher, (Dokumente, p. 86) ; and Haftmann, p. 89. 264 Reference to Pollock's painting is inHaftmann, Malerei in 20.Jahrhundert, p. 464. Pollock's statements arefromMy Painting, Possibilities,NewYork, 1947. QuotedfromHerbertRead, op. cit., p. 267. 264 ThequotationfromJung isfrom CollectedWorks, vol.IX,p.l73. 265 Read'squotation ofKlee isfromConcise HisUny ...,op. cit., p. 180. 265 Marc'sstatement isfrom Brtefe, Aufzeichnmgen tmd Aphorismen; Dokwnenie, p. 79. 265 The discussion ofMarini isfromEdouard Roditi, DiaUsge Sber Kunst, InselVerlag, 1960. ("nie conversation is given here in averyabbreviatedform.) 2^ ThestatementbyManessier is quotedfrom W. Haftmann, op. cit., p. 474. 268 Bazaine'scomment isfrom his Pfotes svr lapeinture d'asgomd'Jm, op. cit. ; Dokumente, p. 126. 270 Thestatementby Klee isfromW. Haftmarm, Pad Klee, p. 71. 270 Forreference tomodem art in churches, see Vf. Schmalenbach, Z^ecAmsiellmg con AlfredManessier, ZurichArt Gallery, 1959. Symbolsinanindividualanalysis JolandeJacobi 273 ThePalaceofDreams:a 16th-centuiy illustration toBookXIX ofHomer's Odyss^. In the center niche stands thegoddess ofsleepholdingabouquet of poppyflowers.Onher right is theGate ofHorn (with the headofahomedoxabove it) ; from thisgatecometme dreams: onher lefttheGateofIvorywith an elephant's headabove; from this gatecome false dreams.Top left, thegoddessofthemoon Diana; top right. Night, with theinfants SleepandDeath. 277 Theimportance ofthe firstdream inan analysis is indicatedbyJunginModem Man in Searchofa Soul, p. 77. 290 Regarding the section on the OracleDream, see the IChing orBookofChanges, trans.RichardWilhelm (with anintroductionby C. G.Jung), RoudedgeandKegan Paul, London, 1951, vols. Iand II. Thesymbolism in the threeupper lines ofthe sign Meng -- ^the"gate" -- ismentioned in op. cit., vol. II, p. 299,which also states that this sign" ... isa bypath; itmeans littlestones, doorsand openings . . . eunuchs andwatchmen, the fingers ..." For the sign Meng, see alsos-ol. I, p. 20 ff. 292 ThequotationfromtheIChing is in vol. I, p. 23. 292 Concerningasecondconsultingofthe/CAtng,Jung writes (in his Introduction to the English edition, p. x) :"A repetition oftheexperiment isimpossible for thesimplereason that the original situation cacmotbe bereconstmcted. Therefore in each instance there is onlya firstandsingle anssver." 292 For thecommentaryon thesign Li, see op. cit., vol. I,p.l78;andareference in vol. II, p. 299. 293 Themotifofthe "cityonthemountain" is discussed KcrenyiinDas Geheimrnsdechohen Sladte, EmopaischeRecue, 1942,Juli-August-Heft; andin Esrqyr ona ScienceofMythology,Bollingen SeriesXXIII, p. 16. 294 Jung's discussionofthemotifoffourappear, for instance, in his Collected Works, vols. IX, XI, XII, and XIV; buttheproblemofthefour, with all itsimpli- cations, iswoven likearedthreadthrough all hisworks. 297 Forsome ofthesymbolicmeanings ascribed to playingcards, seeHandu.'orterbuch desDeutschen Aberglaubens, vol. IV, p. 1015,andvol.V, Op. 1110. Thesymbolismofthenumbernine is discussed in (among otherworks) F.V. Hopper'sMedievalNumber Symbolism, 1938, p. 138. 299 Concerningthe"night-sea-joumey" pattern ofthis dream, seeJ.Jacobi,"The Process ofIndividuation," ofAnalyticalPsycholop, vol. Ill, no. 2, 1958, p. 95. 890 Theprimitive beliefin thepowerofbodilysecretions is discussedbyE.Neumann in OriginsofConsciousness (German edition), p. 39. Scienceandthennconscions M.-L. vonFranx 304 Thearchetypes as nur/riofthepsyche are discussed byW. Pauli in Aufsatzeund Vortrage uber Physik und Erkenntnis-theorie, VerlagVieivegBraunschweig, 1961. 304 Concerning theinspiringorinhibitingpowerofthe archetypes, see C. G.Jungand IV. Pauli, Naturerklarung undPsyche, Zurich, 1952, p. 163 andpassim. Pauli's suggestionconcerningbiologyappears in Aufsatzeund Vortrage, op. cit., p. 123. For fiirtherexplanation ofthestatementconcerning thetimerequired formutation, see Pauli, /.c., pp. 123-25. 306 ThestoryofDarwinandWallace can^foundin HenshawWard'sCurlerDanrih, 1927. 307 The reference toDescartes isexpanded in M.-L.von Franz's"DerTraum des Descartes," in Studien desC. G. Jung Instituts, called "ZeitloseDokuments der Secle." Kepler's assertion is discussed byJungand Pauli in NaturerklarungundPsyche, l.c., p. 1 17. Heisenberg's phrasesvas quotedbyHarmahArendt in TheHuman CorAition, Chicago Univ. Press, 1958, p. 26. 307 Pauli's suggestion ofparallel psychologicaland physical studies appears in Naturerklarung, l.c., p. 163. 307 For Niels Bohr's ideas ofcomplementarity, see his Atomphysik undmenschliche Erkenntnis, Braunschweig, p.26 ff. 308 "Momentum" (ofasubatomic particle) is, in German, Beuegungsgrosse. Thestatement quotedfrom Pauliwas quotedby Jung in "The Spirit ofPsychology," inJos. Campbell's Coll. PapersoftheEranos TearBook, Bollingen SeriesXXX, 1,N.Y. Pantheon Books, 1954, p. 439. Pauli discusses the "primary possibilities" in Vortrage, l.c., p. 125. 308 Theparallek between microphysicsand psychological concepts alsoappear in Vortrage; the description oftheimconsciousbyparadoxes, pp. 115-16; the archetypes as "primary possibilities," p. 115; the unconscious as a "field," p. 125. 309 The quotation from Gauss is translatedfrom his Werke, voL X, p. 25, letter to Olbers, and is quoted in B. L. vun derWaerden, Einfallund Ueberlegung; Dreikleine Beilrage zurPsyckologie des mathematischen Denkens, Basel, 1954. Poincare's statement is quoted in ibid., p. 2. Pauli's beliefthat the conceptoftheunconscious would affect all natural sciences is in Vortrage, p. 125. Theideaofthe possible one-ness oflifephenomena was takenupbyPauli, ibid., p. 1 18. 309 ForJung's ideason the "synchronisticarrangement" includingmatterand psyche, see his "Sj-nchronicity:An Acausal Connecting Principle," CoU. IV'orksvol. VIII. 309 Jung'sideaofthe ifliajmnndtijfollowssomemedieval philosophic ideas in scholasticism (JohnDuns Scotus, etc.) :Theunusmunduswas the total orarchetypri concept oftheworldin God'smind beforeheput it into actual reality. 309 The quotationfromHannahArendtappearsm TheHuman Condition, l.c., p. 266. 309 Forfurther discussion of ' 'primarymathematical intuitions," see Pauli, Vortrage, p. 122; and also Ferd. Conseth, "I.esmathematiquesetlarealit6," 1948. 310 Pauli,foUowingJung, points out thatour conscious representations are"ordered" beforebecoming conscious in Vortrage, p. 122. See also Conseth, l.c. B.L.vanderWaerden'sstatement isfrom his Einfallund Ueberlegung, l.c., p. 9. Index Page numbers in italics refer to captions to illustrations. aborigines, Australian, 95, 131, 204, 205 active imagination, 206-7. Adam, 70, 82, 200-1 adolescence, 74, 117, 121, 130, 132, 287 advertising, 36, 50, 221, 224 Aeschbacher, Hans, 234 Aesculapius (Asklepios), 76, 154 African m)rths and rites, 24, 43, 45, 82, 235, 236, 237 alchemy, 30, 54, 68, 156, 204, 210, 246, 246, 254, 262-3, 282 anima, 30, 31, 97, 123 ff., 152, 177 ff., 205, 216, 283, 289, 302; eroticism and, 179-80, 181', four stages of, 185-6, 185', as guide, 182-8, 186, 187; and mother, 125 ff., 178-9; negative, 178-9, 178, 179, 180, 181; personifications, 178, 180, 183, 185-8; positive, 180 ff. ; projection of, 180, 183, 188; worship of, 185-8 animals: in art, 234-9; in fairy tales, 137-9, 206, 207; in reli^ous symbolism, 21, 29, 237-9, 239; as symbols of Self, 207; and transcendence, 149 ff.; see also totems animus, 30, 97, 136 ff., 177, 189-95, 216; and father, 189; four stages of, 194-5, 194; as group, 191, 192, 193; negative, 189, 191; positive, 192 ff. Anthony, St., 49, 180 Apollo, 149 archetypes, 47, 66, 67 ff., 68, 81, 90, 96, 99, 304; definition of, 67-8; see also symbols Arendt, Hannah, 309 Ariadne, 125, 141 Arp, Jean (or Hans), 252, 259-60 art: "abstract," 251, 252 ff., 261 ff.:cave paintings, 148, 235-7; imaginative, 246, 250 ff., 261 ff.; religious, 232, 237-9, 243, 243-5, 270, 271 Artemidorus, 78 Arthur, King, 110, 111, 196, 198, 215,215 Athena, 110, 185 atomic bomb, 101, 221 atoms, 22, 307 Bazaine, Jean, 250, 254, 268 Beatrice, 183, 186 "Beauty and the Beast," 137-4, 193-4 Bible, the, 72, 74 bird, as symbol, 151-2, 153-7 BirKhauser, Peter, 187, 199 Bischof, Werner, 268, 268 Blake, William, 54, 72, 186, 219 Blueb^d, 190, 191 Bocklin, Arnold, 277, 278, 278, 281, 282 Bohr, Niels, 307, 308 Braque, Georges, 253 Brasilia, 213 Breton, Andr6, 257, 258-9 Breuer, Josef, 26 Bronte, Emily, 190 Brueghel, Pieter, 86, 168 Buddha and Buddhism, 85, 101-2, 115, 152, 175, 224, 233, 240, 242; Zen, 75, 207, 233, 233, 241 bull, as symbol, 139, 147-8, 147 Caravaggio, Michelangelo, 47 Caiik, Carlo, 254 Carroll, Lewis, 53 Chagall, Marc, 41, 127, 256, 257 Cheiron, 110, 111 childhood, dreams, 165, 165; ego, 165-6; memory, 99, 165 Chirico, Giorgio de, 170, 254-7 pass. Christ, 21, 71, 72, 80, 81, 82, 83, 89, 108, 142, 145-7, 224, 239, 241; symbols of, 76, 238-9, 239, 270 Christianity, 21, 64, 72-4, 75, 85, 101-2, 142 ff., 185, 187, 238, 241, 245, 270 Christmas, 50, 81, 107-8 Christopher, St., 218, 219 Churchill, Sir Winston, 173 Circe, 283 circle, symbol of, 240-9, 259; see also mandala circumcision rites, 131, 132, 237 civilization, stresses of, 45-7, 52, 93-6, 101 Cleopatra, 184 Cocteau, Jean, 178, 178 complementarity, 307, 308 complexes, 28, 29, 79 consciousness: evolution of, 23-5, 76, 98; four functions of, 60, 61; limits of, 21, 229; separation from instinct, 83; subliminal aspects, 39-43; and the un- conscious, 32-8, 39-53, 64, 83-5; see also ego Cosmic Man, 200-2, 201, 202 Cranach, Lucas, 29, 86 cross, symbol of, 20, 80, 90, 91, 96, 243-5 cryptomnesia, 37-8 crystal, as symbol, 209, 211 crystal gazing, 28 Dali, Salvador, 257, 258 Danae, 280 dancing, 34, 35, 98, 236, 236 Dante Alighieri, 183, 186 Darwin, Charles, 33, 56, 306 David, 222 death, 74, 75, 148, 189-91 Delacroix, EugSne, 120, 222 Delaunay, Robert, 247, 248 Demeter, 197 Democritus, 307 Descartes, Ren6, 38, 307 diamond, as symbol, 217 Dionysus, 141 ff. disk, symbol of, 215 dissociation, 24-5, 24, 52, 83-5, 213, 221, 222, 249 dragons, 41, 74, 120-1, 123, 125-6, 156 dreams, 20 ff., 38, 41, 63, 64, 72, 74, 76, 78; analogies in, 64, 78; analysis, 32, 43, 55-8, 96, 99; dream books, 53; compensatory, 31, 50-3, 62-3, 67, 74, 95; descriptions and transcriptions, 43, 49, 50, 53-4, 56, 57, 66, 69 ff., 116, 132, 135, 136, 137, 139, 140, 145, 152-3, 163, 165, 169-71, 183-5, 192, 276 ff. pass.; guidancefrom, 208; individuation process and, 161-2; nature of, 39; primitive ideas of, 52, 161-2; recurring, 33-4, 62, 160; rejection of, 29, 31, 39, 50, 52; sexuality in, 29, 92; sleep and, 63; the unconscious and, 27 ff., 63-4, 78, 98; warnings from, 50-1, 74-5, 78 drugs, 259, 260 Duchamp, Marcel, 252-3 earth altar, 162, 162 Easter, symbolism of, 108, 142 Eckhart, Meister, 202 Eden, Garden of, 86 ego: and anima, 185; and animus, 193; and hero myth, 112, 118-21, 123, 126-8, 132; and individuation, 165-7; and shadow, 118-21, 168 ff.; and Self, 128 ff., 149, 161, 161-4, 197 ff., 208, 213 f., 240 Eleusinian mysteries, 79, 148, 280 Eliot, T. S., 152 Elijah, 286 Elizabeth I, Queen, 200 Elizabeth IT, Queen, 71 emotion, 61, 91, 99 Ensor, James, 296 Epona, 98 Epstein, Jacob, 47 Eros and Psyche, 193 Ernst, Max, 220, 233, 234, 253, 258, 260 von Eschenbach, Wolfram, 187 Escorial, Spain, 275 L'Etoile, 242 Eve, 185, 188 existentialism, 163 extraversion and introversion, 58, 59-60, 171, 172 Ezeldel, vision of, 20, 45, 74 fairy tales, 167, 167, 193, 196, 197, 206, 207, 279, 289; Bath Badgerd, 216; Beauty and the Beast, 137-40, 193; Cinderella, 176, 197 Faust, 81, 121 feeling function, 61, 99, 185, 278, 286 Feiffer, Jules, 58 fertility rites, 79, 106-8, 107, 142, 147-8, 154-6, 235, 237, 286 Fierz-Da\id, Linda, 145 fire, as symbol, 78 First Man, 200-02, 202 Flaubert, Gustave, 182 fortune telling, 28 four, motif of, 21, 70, 71, 72, 112, 199, 200, 213, 225, 226, 240-2, 249, 289, 293, 299; and the anima, 185, 187 •, and the animus, 194, 194", and the Self, 213 Frederick the Great, 55, 55 free association, 26-31, 27, 28 Freud, Sigmund, 25, 26, 47, 56, 63, 64, 67, 99, 227, 285; and dream analysis, 56-7; free association theory, 2W1; and Jung, 57 Friedrich, Kaspar, 214 Fuseli, Henry, 63, 192 Gandhi, Mahatma, 58, 194 Gauguin, Paul, 184 Gauss, Karl, 308 Gayomart, 200, 217 George, St., 237 God, 72, 82, 186; "death of," 255, 267; dreams and, 102 Goethe, Johann W. von, 81, 121, 123, 185, 186, 277 Gossaert, Jan, 280 Goya, Francesco, 41, 65, 74 GrandvtUe (Jean Gdrard), 298 Great Mother, 81, 94, 95, 98, 125 ff., 141, 154, 205, 224, 225 Greatrakes, Valentine, 286 Grosz, Georg, 283 Grunen-ald, Matthias, 49 Hades and Persephone, 189 Haffenrichter, Hans, 211 Haggard, H. Rider, 186, 187 Hare, myth of, 112 ff. Heisenberg, Werner, 229, 307 Helen ofTroy, 184 Hemingway, Ernest, 194 Hercules (Heracles), 110, 168 hermaphrodite, 30, 203, 204, 278 Hermes, 154-6 Hermetic philosophy, 73, 156 hero myth, 72-3, 78-9, 110 ff., 128, 131 ff., 266-7 Hinduism, 42, 90, 91, 92, 136, 151, 175, 203, 206, 237-8, 239 HUIer, Adolf, 79, 111, 173 Hobbes, Thomas, 201 Holy Ghost, 142-3 horse, as symbol, 98, 170, 174; winged, Horus, 20, 21, 79, 242 h'bris, no, 113. 114, 121 Hmerolornachia (Dream ofPoliphilo), 41, 1S6, 278 hysteria, 33-4, 34, 35; collective infection. Icarus, 121 / CAr'fi^ orSoak ofChanges, The, 291-3 imagination, 92 "ima^ative" art, 246, 250 ff. immortality, 87, 148 incest fear, 138-9 India, 43, 240; see also Hinduism, Buddhism individuation, 90, 160 ff.; beginnings, 164-7; defimtion, 160-1; difficulties of, 166, 175-6; meandering pattern of, 160, 160; process of, 160 ff.; and religion, 224-9; and society, 218-24 inferiority, 62-4 initiation rites, 74, 129 ff., 132, 134, 143, 146, 148, 153-4, 157 inspiration, 38, 306, 307; drugs and, 260 instinct, 52, 68, 69, 75-6, 83, 94, 239 introversion, see extraversion intuition function, 60, 61, 92 Isis, 186 Ishtar, 277 Jacob's dream, 209, 233 Jacoby, Erhard, 39, 229 James, William, 308 Jerusalem, 208 Joan of Arc, 189 Job, 73 Jonah, 119, 120 Jung, C. G., 9 fir., 26, 53, 56, 106, 107, 109, 118, 128, 129, 142-3, 149, 156, 160, 161, 162, 165, 168, 173, 177, 185, 198, 203, 207, 208, 211, 212, 213, 225, 240, 241, 243, 247, 248, 249, 255, 257, 260, 261, 265, 267, 277, 281, 285, 287, 291, 294, 302, 304-10 pass.; and Freud, 26-8, 56-8 Kandinsky, WassOy, 247, 248, 250, 251-3, Kant, Irmnanuel, 56 Kekule, Friedrich, 38, 38 Kepler, Joharmes, 307 Klee, Paul. 167, 247, 248, 254, 262, 262, 263-4, 263, 269 Koran, the, 175 Krishna, 224 Kuhn, Herbert, 234-6 pass., 246, 250 Ku Klux Klan, 168 Kwan-Yin, 97, 187-8 landscapes, in dreams, 214, 215 Landseer, Edwin, 280 "laying on of hands," 286, 286 Lcda and the Swan, 239 L^ger, Fernand, 270 Leonardo da Vinci, 27, 245 Leucippus, 307 Leviathar:, 201 L6vy-Bruhl, Luden, 24 Lippold, Richard, 230 Lloyd George, David, 194 Lourdes, 285 Ludfer, 72, 267 Lull, Raimon, 76 Lurcat, Jean, 271 Luther, Martin, 175 Magdalen, St. Mary, 217 Magritte, Rcn6, 255 Malevich, Kasimir, 251, 253 mandala, 21, 158, 165, 166, 199, 213-17, 213, 214, 215, 225, 227, 289, 299, 302; in architeaure, 242-5; in art, 240 ff 240, 242, 243, 246, 248 Manessier, Alfred, 268, 270, 271 Marc, Franz, 261, 262, 263 Marini, Marino, 266-7, 266 Mark, St., 21, 89 marriage, 134, 137; sacred, 134-6 Mary, the Virgin, 118, 185, 185, 187, 188, masks, 24, 45, 104, 127, 236, 238 Mass, Catholic, 142-3 Masson, Andr6, 217 Mathieu, Georges, 265 Matisse, Henri, 247 mediums, 77, 151 Medusa, 205 megalomania, 62-4, 89 ' menhirs, 233, 233 menstruation, 132 Mephistopheles, 121 Mercury, 156 microphysics, 306-9 Miro, Joan, 253 "misoneism," 23, 31, 33 Mithras, 147, 237 hfohammcd 156, 188, 210, 210 Mona Lisa, 185, 186 Mondrian. Piet, 248, 249, 262, 262, 263 moon, the, 97, 276, 277 Morienus, 210 Moses, 45, 175 Mt. Williamson, 208 Ml. Rushmorc, 208 Mozart, W'olfgang, 178 mungu, 81 mysteries, 131, 141, 142; Elcusinian, 79, 148, 280 myths and mythology: Babylonian. Ill, 231; Celtic, 98, 204; Chinese, 97, 187-8, 200, 201, 202; Egyptian. 19, 20, 22, 53, 55, 79, 89, 132, 155, 155, 156, 170, 171, 237-8, 242, 296; Eskimo, 177, 196, 216, 228; Greek, 51, 76, 76, 78-9. 90, 106, 107, 110, III, 113, 114, 124, 124-5, 140, 141, 142-3, 142 f., 144, 147, 154, 156, 177, 184, 185, 189, 193, 197, 205, 238, 239, 280, 282, 282; Haidu Indians, 72; hero, 72-3, no ff.; and individuarion, 167; Mayan, 42; Naskapi Indians. 161-2, 208, 213; Navaho Indians. 71, 74, 114, 114, 126, 213, 2/5; Norse, 108, 113, 122, 238; Persian, 108, 111, 147, 200, 217, 237; Pueblo Indians, 89; Roman, 3'7 110, 115, 142, 144, 154,242;Scandinavian, 111\ Slavonic, 178-, Teutonic, 178 Nash, Paul, 248, 249 Navaho Indians, 71, 74, 114, 114, 126, 213, 215 Neumann, Erich, 304, 309 Nicholson, Ben, 246 Nietzsche, Frie^ich, 37, 74, 255 No drama, 236, 238 numbers, mythological aspects of, 40, 42, 297, 307, 309-10; see also four numinosity, 79, 93, 94-9, 101 Nut, 118, 132 obsession, 47 Oedipus, 181 oracles and omens, 51, 211, 290-3 Orpheus, 141 if. Osiris, 79 Palmanova, Italy, 242 Paul, St., 47, 89 Pauli, Wolfgang, 261, 307-9 pass. Penn, William, 86 Perseus, 110, 125, 125 persona, 287, 287 phallus, 91-2, 143, 156; see also lingam philosopher's stone, 205, 210 phoenix, 297, 298 physics, nuclear, 261, 307 if. Picasso, Pablo, 147, 252, 253, 260 pig, as symbol, 148, 153, 154, 282, 283 Plutarch, 242 Poincare, Henri, 38, 309 Pollock, Jackson, 264, 264 Pompeii, 267 Priestley, J. B., 277, 278, 279, 304 primitives, 43, 52, 53, 55, 67, 74, 76, 79, 81, 88, 90, 93, 94, 98-9, 106-9, 110, 122, 126, 127, 128, 129, 140, 148, 149, 153-4, 177, 206, 208, 233-7, 233, 235, 237, 239, 243, 246, 285, 286, 300; "bush soul," 24, 24, 25, 45; initiation, 130 fif., 131, 134; obsession, 47; possession, 34, 35 propaganda, 79, 86, 221, 222, 224 psyche: animal, 75-6; compass of, 60; development of, 66, 67, 75-6, 99; nucleus of, 161-7 pass., 196 ff. pass.; structure, 161, 161, 165; totality of, 161-7 pass., 196 ff. pass. psychic associations, 27-31, 39-54 psychic manifestations, 55, 306 psychoanalysis: and Freud, 25-8, 56-8; individual approach to, 57-8, 65-6, 92; types in, 58 ff. psychological tyjies, 58 ff. Pythagoreans, 40, 42 quatemity, see four Radin, Paul, 112 Raven, 72 Read, Sir Herbert, 265 rebirth, 12, 74, 75, 107-9, 123, 130, 132, 145 ff., 296, 297 regression, 124 religion: and art, 235, 240 ff., 270; failure of, 94, 101; and individuation, 224-9; in modem life, 85-9, 101-2; symbolism in, 21, 21, 55, 55, 75-6, 79, 80, 81, 82, 89, 89-91, 96, 108, 142-3, 145 ff., 225-6, 237-9, 239; see also Buddha, Christiani- ty, Hinduism, Mohammed Rembrandt, 103 Renaissance, the, 244-5, 253 Renoir, Auguste, 245 river crossing, motif of, 198, 199 Roditi, Edouard, 265-7 Rome, foundation of, 242 Roosevelt, Eleanor, 200 Rorschach, Hermann, 27 Rosati, James, 234 rose, white, 138, 241; window, 159 Russia, 28, 49, 86, 250 sacrifice, of hero, 120, 121-3, 131 ff.; of animals, 47, 147, 148, 237 Salome, 179 Sapientia, 185, 186 Satan, 72, 226, 227 scarab bwtles, 296, 297 schizophrenia, 65, 261 Schopenhauer, Arthur, 56, 255 Schweitzer, Dr. Albert, 200 Schwitters, Kurt, 252, 253-4 Self, 128-9, 161 ff.; definition, 161, 161-2; and ego, 128 ff., 162, 215-17; and indivi- duation, 163-4; personifications of, 196 ff.; realization of, 212 ff.; and shadow, 173-6; social aspects of, 218 ff.; symbols of, 187, 207 ff., 212 ff., 240 ff., 302 sensation function, 60-1, 60, 240 serpents (and snakes), 35, 38, 70, 74, 76, 152, 154-6, 154, 239 sexual symbolism, 29, 29, 30, 91-2 shadow, 93. 118, 168 ff., 294 Shakespeare, William, 192 shamans, 149, 151, 177-8, 177, 236 Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 194 signs, 20, 55, 55 Soulages, Pierre, 270, 270 spiral motif, 225-6, 227 spirit in matter, 205, 208, 253 ff. square, symbol of the, 242, 246, 247, 248-9, 248 Stalin, J. V., 234 Stevenson, Robert Louis, 24, 38 stone, symbolism of, 43, 204, 205, 207, 208, 208-11, 210, 217, 232-5 sun symbols, 21, 22, 241, 246, 296, 303 superstition, 82, 94-6, 290 surrealism, 257-8, 258 Switzerland, 204, 219, 236, 276, 285, 298 f. symbols and symbolism, 22, 29, 43, 52, 53, 55, 64, 66, 90, 90-9, 102, 103, 106-9, 118, 122-3, 127, 129, 132, 138, 142, 147, 149-57, 1^229 pass.; definition, 21-2, 54; in art, 232 ff.; religious, 21, 21, 22, 55, 72-3, 75-6, 76, 79, 80, 81, 82, 89 89-91, 90, 96. 108, 142-3, 145 ff., 185-7, 200-3, 224-9, 237-9; sexual, 29, 29, 30 91-2; of totality, 196-211 synchronicity, 55, 211, 291, 306, 310 Tarzan, 194 Theseus, 110, 125, 125 thinking function, 60, 60-1 Thurber, James, 64, 78 Tibet, prayer wheel, 28; mandalas, 240 Tintoretto, 245 totality, circle symbols of, 240-9; other symbols, 196-211 pass. totems, 45, 129, 129, 237 de la Tour, Georges, 217 Trakl, Georg, 260 transcendence, 149 ff. tree symbol, 43, 45, 76, SO, 81, 90, 153, 161-4, 187 TrSmois, Pierre-Yves, 271 Trickster, 112 ff., 113, 140, 149, 151, 156 Trinity, the, 225, 307 Trois Frferes caves, 235-6, 236 Tuc d'Audubert cave, 235-6 Turner, William, 289 Twins myth, 112 ff., 115, 124, 130, 132 unconscious, the, 20 ff.; collective, 55, 67, 107; and consciousness, 32-8, 63-4; and ego, 118, 217; fear and rejection of, 93, 98, 102; knowledge from, 37-8, 76-8, 76; neurosis and, 34; and religion, 55, 225-9; see also psyche unidentified flying objects (UFOs), 249,249 utopia concepts, 85, 86 Valentino, Rudolph, 194 Villa de Misteri (Pompeii), 143, 143 visions, 20, 45, 47 Voltaire, Francois, 220, 221 Waerden, B. L. van der, 310 Wagner, Richard, 193 war, motif of, 107, 108 Washington, George, 198 wise old man, 98, 196, 198 wise old woman, 196, 277, 279 witches, 177, 181, 188 witch doctors, 45, 82; see also shamans women: as anima figures, 177 ff.; and the animus, 189 ff.; and the irrational, 177, 177, 195; see also wise old woman. Great Mother word-association tests, 28 World War 1, 120 World War H, 94, 108, 111, 198 Warringer, Wilhelm, 265 Yang and Yin, 290 yantra, 240, 240 zodiac, 237 / Illustration credits Key: (B) bottom; (C) center; (L) left; (M) middle; (R) right; CO top; and combinations, e.g. (BR) CTL) Academia de San Fernando, Madrid, 65(BR); © A.D. A.G.P., Paris, 216(BL), 27I(ML)(BR); courtesy Ad- ministrationskanzlei des Naturhistorischen Museums, Wien, 285(BC); Aerofilms and Aero Pictorial, 218(BL), 243(TL); Signor Agnelli, 251(BR); Albertina, Vienna, 169(BL); Alte Pinakothek, Mum'ch, 87(BR), 115(BR), 280; Aunerican Museum of Natural History, 68(BL); courtesy the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Trustees of Lambeth Palace Library, 156(BL); Archives Photo- graphiques, Paris, 204(TR); The Art Institute of Chicago, Potter Palmer Collection, 245(BR); Arts Council of Great Britain, 147; Ruth Berenson & Norbert Muhlen, George Grosz 19611 Arts Inc., New York, 283; Associated Press, 79(BL). Courtesy Miss Ruth Bailey, 52, 57, 198(TQ; Collection Frau Dr. Lydia Bau, 220(MR); Bayreuther Fest^iele, 192CMR); Berlin Staatl. Museen, Antiken- abteilung, 5I(BL); BibliothJque de la Bourgeoisie, Berne, 188(BC); Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, 99, 110(MR), 140, 145(BQ, 189(BR), 2I5(BR), 222(TL), 298(TL); Peter Birkhauser, 187(TR), 199; Black Star, 35(BL), 59(BR), 117(BL), 201(TL), 235CrR); 77re Slue Angel (director; Josephvon Sternberg), Germany, 1930, 179(1^; Bodleian Library, Oxford, 176(B); The Bollingen Foun- dation, New York, 38(BC), 72(L), 107(BC); British Crown Copyright, 71(R), 120(TR); courtesy the Trustees of the British Museum, 21, 38(BL), 42(1:), 53(BR), 54(M), 55(BL), (Natural History) 66, 105, 107(BL), 110(BL), lll(ML) (MQ, 115(1), I24(BL), 125(BR)(BL). 133, 144(TR). 145(BR), 150(BR), 155(1), 156(BR), 160, 165(BR), 171(TR), 186(BL), 188(BL), 190(BL), 192(BR), 195(TL), 197(TL), 198(TL), 209(BL), 216(BR), 259(MR), 273, 281, 298 (BL); Shirley Burrou^, 80(1). Cabinet des Medailles, Paris, 141(BL)(BR); Cairo Museum, 22(T); Camera Press, 47(TL), 97(B), 111(BR), 194(BL); Jonathan Cape Limited, London, from Angkor Wat, Malcolm MacDonald, 91(BR); Central Press, 50(TR); W. & R. Chambers Limited, from Twentieth Century Dictionary, 45; Church of England Information Office, 30(R); CIBA Archives, Basle,239(MR); courtesy Jean Cocteau, 138, 139, 178(BL); ^mpagnie Aerlenne Franqaise, 242(TL); Contemporary Films Ltd., Ugetsu Monogatari (director: Kenji Mizo- guchi),Japan, 1953, 182(1) and Zero de Conduite (director: Jjan Vigo), Franfilmdis Production, France, 1933, 116; ^nzett &Huber, Zurich, 26, 166{BL), 188(MC), 258(TL), University Press, Ithaca, New York, Blanc (director: Albert Lamorisse), France, iMm Motion Picture Company Ltd., «Al); courtesy Madame Delaunay, 248(TR); Maya iJeren, The Using Gods of Haiti, 35(TL)(TC)(TR); by wurtesy of Walt Disney Productions. 110(BR); La Dolce (Sector: Federico Fellim), Italy/France. 1959, courtesy Madame Trix Diirst-Haass, 263(TR); Jl^BecUon Dutuit, 241(TL). Edinburgh University li- t3ry, II9(BR), 210(ML); Editions Albert Guillot, Paris, 209(BR); Editions d'Art, Paris, 27l(TR); Editions Hoe- Qui, Paris, 44; Editions Houvet, 20; Education and Teal- vision Filins Ltd., 112(BL); Esquire Magazine © 1963 by Esquire, Inc., 5I(TR). Faber & Faber Ltd., London, Dance and Drama in Bali, by Beryl de Zoete and Walter Spies, 126; Jules Feiffer, permission of the artist's agent, 58; Find Your Man, Warner Bros., 1924, 206(BL); W. Foulsham & Co. Ltd., London, 53(BL); courtesy M.-L. von Franz, 215(ML)(BL), 227; French Government Tourist Office, London, 127(BR), 232(1), 243(TR) artist Henrard; Frobenius-Institut an der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universitat, Frankfurt a.M., 202. Gala Film Distributors Ltd., 192(1); Galerie de France, 271(ML); Galerie Stangl, Munich, 260(BR), 261(B); Germanisches, National-Museum, Nuremberg, ISlfTL); German Tourist InformationBureau,London,237(BR);Giraudon, 85(MR), 99, 103(L), 112(BR), 154, 181(TR), ]84(BL)(BR), 185(BR), 215(BR), 217, 223(BL), 225, 234(TL), 252(TL); Godzilla (directors: Jerry Moore & Ishiro Honda), Japan/U.S.A., 1955, 93(BR); Goethehaus, Frankfurt a.M., 63; courtesy Samuel Goldwyn Pictures Ltd., 65(BL); Gotebor^ Konstmuseum, 266(TR); Granada TV, 173; Graphis Press, Zurich, 98(TL), 247(1); Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, 248(BL). George G. Harrap, London, Fairy Tales, Hans Christian Andersen, 1932, I97(BL); by permission of the President and Fellows of Harvard College, 109(M); William Heinemann Ltd., London, The Twilight of the Gods by Ernest Gann, 178(BR); reproduced by gracious permission of Her Majesty The Queen, 245(BL); from Conze, Heroen und Gdttergestalten, ]55(BL); Hiroshima mon Amour (dirretor: Alain Resnais), France/Japan, 1958-9, 221(TL); Homiman Museum, 126; Ides et Calendes, Neuchatel, Faces of Bronze,photo Pierre Allard & Phillipe Luzuy, 88, 237(BL); Imperial War Museum, London, 121(BL); Inter Nationes, 54(B); Irish Tourist Board, 210(BR). Erhard Jacoby, 39, 229; Japan Council against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs, 100(B); Dr. Emilio Jesi, Milan, 256(BR); The Jewish Institute of History, Warsaw, 94(BL); courtesy the family ofC G Jung, 56; KarshofOttawa, frontispiece; Keystone, 108(BR), 157, 172(B), 210(MR), 235(TL); Christopher Kitson 90; Kunsthaus, Zurich, 188(MC); Kunsthis- torischk Museum, Vienna, 29, 188(TL), 2^; Kmst- museum, Basle, 219(BQ, 248(BR), 258(TLX 279C^), Kunstmuseum,Berne,263(TL);Kunstmuseum,Wmterffiur, I92(BL)- Larousse. Editeurs, Paris, ftomLa Mythoiogie by Felix Gffirand. 119(1), 179(BL), dra^g by I. Mibin; Lascaux chapelle de laprehistone, F. Windels, 148; Uyden University Library, 31(T); Librena deUo Stato, Roma, La ma dei Misted, Prof. Maiuri, 142-3(1): Longmans, Green & Co. Ltd., London, 1922, Mazes andl^yrmths, W. H. Matthews, 171(ML)(MC)(MR); Macmdlm & Co. Ltd., London, Alice's Adventures in Wonderlat^ (Sir John Tenniel drawing), 54(1): Magnum, 22(BL), 34. t. 146(BR), 172(T), 194(TMR), 198(B), 208(BL). 238(TR) (BR), 269; Mansell Collection, 46, 150(BL), 190(BR), 191, 197(R), 201(BL), 205, 209(BL), 220(TR), 239(MQ; Marlborough Fine Art Gallery Ltd., London, 252(TR); © The Medici Society Ltd., 150(T); TheMedium (director: Gian-Carlo Menotti), Italy/U.S.A., 1951, m(SR); Metro- Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., 24, 182(BL); Metropolis (director: Fritz Lang), Germany, 1926, 223(BR); courtesy The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 30(L) (The Cloisters Collections Purchase), 40(T) (gift of M. Knoed- ler & Co., 1918), 119(BL), 184(TR) (gift of William Church Osborn, 1949), 231 (Hetcher Fund, 1956); Modern Times, Charles Chaplin, United Artists Corporation Ltd., 113(BR); The Pierpont Morgan Library, New York, 73, 201(BR); Mother Joan of the Angels, Film Polski, 1960, © ContemporaryFilms Ltd., 168; Mt. WilsonandPalomar Observatories, 23, 103(R); Prof. Erwin W. Miiller, Penn- sylvania State University, 22(BR); Musie de Cluny, Paris, 225; Mus6e Conde, Chantilly, lll(MR), 184(BL), 226; Mus6e Ensor, Ostend, 296(B); Mus6e Btrusque de Vatican, 114(BR); Musde Fenaille Rodez, Aveyron, 233(BC); Mus6e Guimet, Paris, 97(1), 241(BL); Mus6e Gustave Moreau, Paris, 179(BR); Mus6e de I'Homme, Paris, 234(TQ, 236(BL); Mus6e du Louvre, Paris, 103(L), 111(TL), 112(BR), 146(TR), 154, 184(BR), 185(BR), 223(BL), 276(B); Musde du Petit Palais, Palis, 241(TL); Mus6es de Bordeaux, 120(BR); Museo Nazionale, Napoli, 124(BR); Museo del Prado, Madrid, 75; The Museum of Navaho Ceremonial Art Inc., New Mexico, 71(TL), 114(BL), 214(BR); Museum fiir Volkerkunde, Basle, 127(L); Museum fur Volkerkunde, Berlin, 177(BC), 300. Nasjonalgalleriet, Oslo, 87(BL); The National Gallery of Canada, 47(TR); National Gallery, London, 83, 122, 288; National Museum, Athens, 76; The National Museum, Copenhagen, 242(TR); © National Periodical Publications Inc., New York, 111(BC); National Portrait Gallery, London, 190(T), 207(BL); Dr. Neel & Univ. ofChicago Press, Human Heredity, Neel & Schull,© 1954, 31(B); Max Niehans Verlag, Zurich, 108(BL); Newsweek, 307 ; TheNew York Times, 134(BL); NigeriaMagazine, 43 ; The Nun's Story (director: Fr^ Zinneman), U.S.A., 1957-9, 134(TL); Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, Copenhagen, 113(BC). Olympic Museum, Athens, 185(BC); On the Bowery (director: Lionel Rogosin), U.S.A., 1955, 62; Open Air Museum for Sculpture, Middelheim, Antwerp, 266(MR); Count Don Alfonso Orombelli, Milan, 256 (ML); © Daniel O'Shea, 189(BL). Palermo Museum, 144(TL); Paris Match, 270; Passion de Jeanne d'Arc (director: Carl Dreyer), France, 1928, 91(BL); Paul Pop- per, 25(BL), 28(BL), 42(BR), 111(BL), 134(ML), 152, 200(TL), 210(BL), 236(BC), 285(BR); Pepsi-Cola Com- pany, 50(TL); Planet News, 32, 169(BR); Le Point Cardinal, Paris, 233(BR); P & O Orient Lines, 151; courtesy H. M. Postmaster-General, 25(BR); Private Collection, London, 203(BL); Private Collection, New York, 256(BL); Punch, 33(L); Putnam & Co. Ltd., Lon- don, 1927, by permission, from The Mind and Face of Bolshevism by Ren6 Fulopp-Muller, 107(BR); G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York, 1953, & Spring Books Ltd., London, from A Pictorial History of the Silent Screen by Daniel Blum, 123. Radio Times Hulton Picture Library, 194(BML), 195(BR), 220(BR), 222(BC); Rapho, 153, (Izis) 165(Bl); Rathbone Books Ltd., 194(TML); Rialites, 212(Bl); Ringier-Bilderdienst AG., 218(BR); Routledge&Kegan Paul Ltd., London, 1951,The • Bolllngen Series XDC, 2nd. edn..New York, 1961,& Eugen Diederichs Verlag, Dusseldorf, 1951, the / Ching or Book ofChanges,291(BL); courtesy MissArianeRump, 201(TR). Salvat Editores S.A., 275(BL); Sandoz Ltd., Basle, 259(B); Scala, 77, 118, 144(BL), 155(BR); Slavko, 187(BR); The Son of the Sheik (director: George Fitzmaurice), U.S.A., 1926, 195(BL);SoprlntendenzaalleAntichit4delle Provmce diNapoli,266(BR) ;©S.P.A.D.E.M., Paris 1964 -147, 167, 247(B), 252(BR), 263(TL); StaaUiche Museen' Berlin-Dahlem, 144(BR); Staat Luzern, 189(BC); Staats- gemaldesammlungen, Munchen, 111(TR); Stadelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt, 185(TR); Swedish National Travel Association, 80(BR), 111(TQ, 286(Bl). Tarzan and his Mate (director: C^ic Gibbons), U.S.A., 1934 194(TL); Tate Gallery, London, 72(R), 187(BL), 249(BL)' 264(BR), 271^R); They Came to a City, J. B. Priestley (director: Basil Deardon), Gt. Britain, 1944, 279(TR); ©1935 James Thurber © 1963 Helen Thurber, from TTiur- ber's Carnival (orig. publ. in The New Yorker), 78(BR); © James Thurber 1933, 33(R); Titanic (director: Herbert Selpin), Germany, 1943, 121(BR); Topix, London, 59^L), 200(TR); Toshodaiji Temple, Japan, 175(BL); Trianon Press, Jura, France, from the Blake Trust Facsimile of Songs of Innocence and of Experience, 219(TL). Uni- Dia-Verlag, 19; USAF Academy, 129(Bc); U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, 100(T). Vatican Museum, 127(TR); Verlag Hans Huber, 27; Verlag Kurt Desch, Munchen, 79(BR); Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 48(B), 109(T)(BL), 115(BL), 136, 163, 174(BR), 198(TR), 203(ML)(BR), 206(ML); Volkswagen Ltd., 36. Collection of Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, 260(BL); Weiner Library,© Auschwitz Museum, Poland, 94(BR); courtesy the Wellcome Trust, 69, 246(TL), 286(BR); Wide World, 117(BR); Gahan Wilson, 49(BL); Worcester Art Museum, Mass., U.S.A., 85(TL); Wuthering Heights (director: William Wyler), U.S.A., 1939, 190(T). Yale University Art Gallery, James Jackson Jarves Collection, 180(TL). Zentralbibliothek, Zurich, 249(BR);© Mrs. Hans Zinsser, from G. F. Kunz, The Magic of Jewels and Charms, 207(ML); Zentralbibliothek Zurich 248(TR). Photographers: Ansel Adams, 208(BL); Alinari, 46; David G. Allen, Bird Photographs Lie., 68(T); Douglas Allen, 222(ML). Werner Bischof, 22(BL), 238(TR)(BR), 269; Joachim Blauel, 261(B); Leonardo Bonzi, 135(BL); Bdouard Boubat, 212^L); Mike Busselle, 28(BR), 93(BL), collages 121(BL)(BR), 135(BR), 180(TR), 181(B), 183(TR)(BR), montages 190(1), 207(TL), 212(BR), 219(BR); Francis Brunei, 239(TR). Robert Capa, 194(TMR), 198(B); Cartier-Bresson, 34, 172(T); Chuzeville, 276(B); Franco Cianetti, 264(BL); Prof. E. J. Cole, 258(BR); J. B. Collins, 35(ML)(MQ; Ralph Crane, 117(BL). N. Elswing, 242(TR). John Freeman, 105, 107(BL), 171(TR), 195(TL), 197(TL), 259(MR), 281, 298(BL). Ewing Galloway, 82(BL); Marcel Gautherot, 213; Georg Gerster, 109(BR); Roger Guillemot, 89. Ernst Haas, 146(BR); Leon Herschtritt, 84; Hinz, Basle, 127(L), 219(BQ, 255. Isaac, 35(BL). William Klein, 85(BL). Lavaud, 97(T), 159, 241(BL); Louise Leiris, 261(BL); Dr. Ivar Lissner, 149(BR); Sandra Lousada at Whitecross Studio, 175(BR); Kurt & Margot Lubinsky, 149(BL). Roger Mayne, 164(BR); Don McCullin, 287; St. Anthony Messenger, 143(B); Meyer, 29; John Moore, 72(R), 238(BL), 252(BL). Jack Nisberg, 256(TR). Michael Peto, 164(BL) ; Axel Poignant, 95, 128, 130, 131, 204(MR). Allen C. Reed, 74, 214(T). Sabat, 65(BR); Prof. Roger Sauter, 243(BL); Kees Scherer, 35(BR); Enhl Schulthess, 201(TC); Carroll Seghers,*" 98(TR); Brian Shuel, 55(BR), 129(BR); David Swann, 21, 48(B), 53(BL), 54(M), 66, 109(T)(BL), 110(BL), 115(T)(BL), 133, 136, 155(1), 163, 174(BR), 187(BL), 188(BL), 190(BL), 198(TR), 203(BR)(ML), 206(ML), 264(BR), 302, 303. Felix Trombe, 234(TC). Villani & Figli Frl., 80(BL). Yoshio Watanabe, 232(B); Hans Peter Widmer, 305. If the publishers have unwittingly infringed copyright in any illustration reproduced they will gladly pay an appropriate fee on being satisfied as to the owner's title.

============================================================

CATAFALQUE BY PETER KINGSLEY CARL JUNG AND THE END OF HUMANITY VOLUME 1 First published in 2018 by Catafalque Press, London www.catafalquepress.com contact@catafalquepress.com ISBN 978-1-9996384-0-5 (two-volume set) Copyright © 2018 Peter Kingsley All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, or stored in any database or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Publisher. Printed by Lightning Source Book design by Leslie Bartlett www.lesliebartlett.com British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library ONE TWO THREE FOUR FIVE SIX SEVEN CONTENTS VOLUME 1 MYSTICAL FOOL BACK TO THE SOURCE THE SUNSET WAY CATAFALQUE VOLUME 2 ABBREVIATIONS NOTES INDEX Et ensi comme je sui oscurs et serai enviers chiaus ou je ne me vaurrai esclairier, ensi sera tous li livres celés et peu avenra que ja nus en face bonté MYSTICAL FOOL Something's beginning is always a particularly magical point, the opening into a world that's new. There -- this book has already begun, which means the magic has been done. And, now, all that's needed is to find the words to fill the abyss between beginning and end. Probably it will be best to start with Eranos. Dreamed up during the early 1930s, the Eranos meetings began taking place each summer at Ascona in southern Switzerland and would soon become notorious. Their original purpose was ambitious but simple -- to create a supportive forum for openly and sincerely discussing spiri- tuality, philosophy, the profoundest questions humans can ask about themselves or the world around them. And over time the most influential figure at these meetings, due to his own presence as well as the people he drew to them, came to be Carl Jung.' Because of my work on the origins of western civilization I was invited to speak at the Eranos gathering in August 2013. This book is an expanded version of the talks that, to the shocked surprise of many respectable people present, I delivered there. Speaking at Eranos provided me with the opportunity to complete a certain circle in my life by acknowledging, and g PART ONE paying deep respects to, two people with whom I have the closest of ties. One of them is Henry Corbin; the other, Carl Jung. It also gave me the chance to say a few things in public, for the first and perhaps the last time, about how my life's work has intersected with Jung's work as well as Corbin's. And it allowed me to complete a much larger circle by outlining what this all has to say about the nature of cultures -- especially about the fate or destiny of our western civilization. Both Carl Jung, somewhat ostentatiously, and Henry Corbin, a little more discreetly, played crucial roles at Eranos. Jung was one of the greatest and most original researchers in psychology the West has ever known. Corbin was welcomed into the Eranos circle as one of the greatest living experts on Sufi mystical tradition and as a scholar who, almost single- handedly, introduced the sophisticated realities of Persian spiritual wisdom to the West. On the surface, the two of them could hardly have been more unlike each other in terms of training or formal interests. But inwardly it was a very different matter. And this can be rather difficult to grasp for people who never quite managed to learn what it means to look beneath the surface. From one side we happen to have Jung's own words confirm- ing in no ambiguous or uncertain terms that Henry Corbin was the one person who understood him far better than anybody else: that it was Corbin who had given him "not only the rarest of experiences, but the unique experience, of being completely understood". Such a meaningful statement should give us pause for thought -- a very long pause. And from the other side we have the striking words by Corbin, that he wrote to explain what became possible at MYSTICAL FOOL 9 Eranos through the influence and inspiration of Carl Jung. He described how Jung's presence produced an "atmosphere of absolute spiritual freedom in which all individuals express themselves without the slightest concern for any official dogma and with just a single goal in mind: to be themselves, to be true".* This, too, deserves pondering very carefully. To be true, not to be clever or entertaining or even inspiring but to be true, was no easy or casual matter in the eyes of Corbin. It meant far more for him than all the glib, superficial talk one tends to hear nowadays about me living my truth and you living yours -- just as "truth" for him meant infinitely more than some arbitrary collection of facts. To him truth, as well as the act of being genuinely true, are timeless and sacred realities that turn our whole illusory world of appearances upside down. They throw us off our comfortable chairs by showing us we are not the personalities we imagined we were: point us back to our true origin, our spiritual source.' Of course words like this can sound very inspiring. But that, too, is just a part of the illusoriness -- because we have managed even to turn spirituality into an illusion so we can protect ourselves from the reality of the spirit. Our modern democratic age has manufactured a personal spirituality to meet everyone's needs which is absolutely guar- anteed to be calm, sweet, peaceful, polite, positive, comfortable, reassuring, unthreatening. And instead of leaving the sacred well alone, which would have been the wisest thing to do, we domesticated it no less effectively than we managed to domes- ticate everything else; trivialized and thoroughly prettified it; agreed on making it into something politically correct. But this happens to be almost the exact opposite of the ancient understanding -- which is that spirituality and the sacred offer the profoundest challenge to our complacency, as 10 PART ONE well as presenting the most radical threat. The spirit is not only there to make us think deeply. It exists to take us into places where thinking becomes useless and even our cleverest ideas are left behind. The story is just the same with regard to truth, or being true: they have come to mean more or less whatever we want them to mean. As a result we have lost any sense for the over- arching, sacred reality of Truth that exists in virtually every culture except our own. It can be helpful now to try and remember how according to ancient Greek tradition -- which aside from being the tradi- tion I feel closest to is also the source and seedbed of western culture -- truth was seen as something extremely painful, even impossible, for most people to bear. Truth, or a/étheia, had its own mythology that confronts humans with the grim but glorious reality of what they are "from the beginning": unimaginably glorious because of their boundless inner potential and unthinkably grim because of the overwhelming responsibilities such a forgotten potential brings. This is why it -- or she, because Truth often appears as a goddess -- was always intimately involved in the superhuman effort to stop that process of forgetting. Her role, above all, was to preside over the supremely urgent task of remembering not what happened yesterday or even last month but what happened in the distant past that shaped this present moment and will also produce our future.° So I am not going to be speaking very much about the past as the past. Neither do I plan on offering a view of ancient Greek spirituality as some pretty oasis: as one more fascinating distraction, yet another illusion. I have been researching, writing, speaking, teaching about the distant past for over forty years; and to me the past as past is no longer relevant. Through writing more and more about the MYSTICAL FOOL 11 ancient world, about the origins of western civilization, I have ended up being forced -- paradoxically but also quite logically -- into the present time. In other words, what I am going to be focusing on is the past as present: on how those aspects of the past we have been forced to forget have shaped and created the bizarre world that we live in.® We are living through an extraordinarily difficult time now. [he trouble is that most people, however intelligent they happen to be and however keen to keep up with the news, don't have the slightest wish to see with open eyes what really is happening in our world. Even if they sense or intuit or suspect something, they have an overwhelming urge to tune it all out and say "No, no: I don't want to know. I just want to go on as before." Well, there is no going on as before. Maybe we'll think we can act in the same way for a few more years; but what we are leaving behind us is a totally different world. And we have a certain responsibility to wake up to the awareness of what that means. ] am going to be saying some disturbing things and there is no point in apologizing for that, because this is the truth of where western civilization has brought us. It has all been leading up to here. Everything that was implicit in our civilization from the very beginning, everything that was already contained inside the seed of western culture, is being acted out now -- in spite of us and regardless of our best intentions -- because of what we have agreed to forget. Our future is guaranteed, automatically determined, by the fundamental fact that we failed to honour our sacred source. Talking at Eranos was the first time I'd spoken openly in two or three years. It was a dream that, back at the start of 2011, bluntly and very directly instructed me to stop all the things I was doing: public speaking, teaching, meetings, interviews. Plenty of other dreams had also been pointing in the same direction, but this one was infinitely more explicit. For a short time I found myself uncertain what to do -- heavily leaning towards taking the radical actions needed, although only leaning. It goes without saying that one has to be a little crazy to pay too much attention to dreams. In fact even most of the Jungians I have met, who literally make dreams their business, insist that no balanced person should ever obey messages or instructions given through a dream. Instead you have to argue with them; do some good negotiating; assert your conscious wishes; give all due weight to your own position. But of course in this world everything ultimately becomes a question of picking one's preferred form of madness. A couple of days later the matter was taken out of my hands. Two friends, living thousands of miles apart, called me almost at the same moment after having the most vivid dreams which very MYSTICAL FOOL 13 plainly were meant for me. And, just as plainly, both dreams were confirming the obvious and explicit message of my dream. Traditionally, in important matters one indication always needs to be considered with all due seriousness -- but three indications are something that has to be acted on straight away.' It became clear to me that everything had already been settled. I was being forced to obey and start carrying out the necessary changes. One commitment which had become too late to cancel was an agreement I had made to speak at a large event near where my wife and I lived in North Carolina. I could never understand why I accepted the invitation in the first place, as the organizers were among the most difficult people imaginable. But just before the day of the event, that mystery was solved. At the last moment an old Cherokee medicine woman in her eighties came down from the hills because she had been shown there was something she needed to do. When I arrived a little early on the morning of the gathering, she was there waiting; we went into a small room together to be alone. As we talked, I remembered my recent dream about stopping speaking and mentioned it to her. Without a moment's hesitation she told me that the only reason she was there was because a bear had recently walked up her driveway, during the night, to wake her and announce that her presence and voice would be needed at this particular event. It had been years, she explained, since she had spoken in public because she had been living the life of silent solitude ever since a clear dream ordered her to stop any outer activity and put all her energy into going entirely inside herself. Then, just before we stood up to go onto the stage and talk to the audience together, she leaned forward in her chair with the energy of a teenager and exclaimed: "Of course we obey these dreams! We a/ways obey such dreams!" 14 PART ONE There is no describing the refreshment of being able to see how intense and unpretentious, how simple and spontaneous, this wise woman was in responding with a whole heart to the call of life even when it disrupts all our tidy schemes and conscious plans.® For myself, putting a complete end to any public speaking and sinking into inner silence led to the sudden realization that I had already finished planting the seeds of my work in North America. It also showed me what was needed next: to focus on creating a far stronger support for everything already seeded by returning, as close as humanly possible, to the original roots of this work in Europe. And there is a certain edge of irony in the fact that a very dear friend -- one of the few great indigenous medicine men still left in North America -- was the person who summed up the whole matter most succinctly because he saw it with such clarity. At the end of every civilization, he noted, the life of that civilization always returns to its source. In the case of western civilization that source is first and foremost the regions around the Mediterranean. And my particular medicine is needed to tend that source as long as such tending is needed; to stand watch over it for the sake of a distant future which will never be ours. Wherever I am, the underlying support of Native Americans is very tangibly with me. Nothing can be more precious than the closeness of those encounters, which have always been so paradoxical; so unexpected; so surprising. And essentially there is nothing more important to talk about because this is where we have come to. We are naked as westerners because we, too, have lost everything. We may seem more prosperous, but we are in exactly the same situation they have been squeezed into for hundreds of years. MYSTICAL FOOL 15 We too are broken. All of us, not just some or a few, are addicts. We have lost any contact with our ancestral homes not because someone chased us out, but because we chase ourselves out. And there is not a single atrocity westerners can inflict on indigenous people that they have not also inflicted on themselves.' We are no better than Native Americans -- no better at all. In fact we are far worse, and worse off, because we no longer even remember what it is we lost. For me personally one thing has been more extraordinary than any other about the Native American medicine women and medicine men, elders and chiefs I have been fortunate enough to meet. This is their intuitive ability to understand immediately, and I mean instantly, what my work is before knowing a single factual detail about it or me -- and before I even get the chance to say a single word. More than once I found myself being welcomed, and from the way events unfolded I could see that what they told me was true, with comments like: "As soon as I caught sight of you walking in, I knew from the way you walked that you work for the Ancestors." These are people who because of how I walk, or because of what they see when they catch a glimpse of me for the first time from behind, are able to look straight into the heart of my work. They had no conscious interest in ancient Greeks, or the history of philosophy, or the origins of western civilization. Probably they'd never even heard, or ever would hear, peculiar words like "Presocratic'. But intuitively, instantly, they knew the job I'm here to do. And in each of their cultures, in every tribe, there is a name for what I do just as there is a name for what I am. In fact there is a whole host of names depending on whether one happens to MYSTICAL FOOL 17 be closest to the west coast of North America, or in the New Mexico desert, or nearer to the east coast. Before I started meeting Native Americans, I could never understand why I was such a difficult person. I always tended to approach everything differently from other people. I would constantly do things back to front. People wanted to move forwards, I wanted to move backwards; they had to turn back, I had to keep going. I was what in many, many traditions -- Cherokee, Lakota, Hopi -- they have their own name for, their own particular word that means "the contrary". And they said to me, one after another, in individual encoun- ters: "Your work is tremendously important. Nobody in your supposedly civilized world will recognize what you do. No one will know the real reason. They'll assume you are being difficult. They'll just think you are complicating things unnecessarily. "But we know; through our traditional wisdom we under- stand. Your work is crucial. Who you are is crucial, because you wake people up. You help them, force them, to face what they turned their backs on. Just through being who you are and without even having to say a word, you make people question everything on a deeper level than they are comfortable ques- tioning things. You are Coyote, howling and calling from the outer edges of your society because you can see what they don't yet notice and because you remember what they already forgot. "And that is your duty: to shock people into an awareness that all life comes from, and returns to, the sacred. That is your medicine: to remind people always of their source. That, as the contrary, is your unavoidable task: to dance in the open for the dead and, by walking backwards, turn people around to face their Ancestors whom they imagine they can do without." So if I disturb you, and this is something I am guaranteed to do, try not to find ways of rejecting me and dismissing what I] say -- because maybe there is a reason for the disturbance. 18 PART ONE Probably you are going to want to say: "OK, I agree with nine-tenths or three-tenths of what Peter Kingsley says. As for the rest, though: No, I don't want to go there." But maybe, just maybe, it will be good for you to stop and pause and simply take another look. Now of course, in Jungian terms, there is a name for what I have been referring to. In fact there are several names for what I am talking about. This ties in with the archetype of the trickster, always on the fringes, turning everything upside down. This ties in with the shadow, bringing up what no one wants to see. And for the sake of completeness I should also add that it ties in with the archetype of the prophet who makes an utter fool of himself by claiming to present grand truths others are not aware of. But, staying faithful to what I have just been saying, I am going to question all that and present everything from an altogether different point of view. Anyone trained as a Jungian will almost certainly want to say: "Well, there we go! Peter Kingsley is identifying with the archetype of the trickster! Very dangerous! One should never, absolutely never, identify with an archetype." And, true to my nature, I am going to say: "Yes, this is very correct and that danger is perfectly real. But in my own experience -- and ultimately my experience is all I have to go by -- there is a secret as well as a mystery that many people labouring in the world of Jung are unaware of." The mystery is that we start off with the familiar image of an average, modest, serene human being: perhaps Swiss, perhaps Australian, French, American, it makes no difference. And here we have this ordinary person, this very down-to-earth and reasonable human being, unknowingly surrounded by all the invisible but dangerous archetypes. Swirling around and MYSTICAL FOOL 19 sometimes lurking threateningly near are the archetype of the trickster, maybe of a great goddess like Artemis or Aphrodite, perhaps the archetype of a prophet or someone else. And you are told and warned, will read, are taught, that this ordinary human being must never ever identify with one of the divine archetypes. That way lies the danger of psychological inflation. That way, for any human, lies madness. But the terrible secret which has been forgotten is that humanity, itself, is an archetype. It can be quite amazing to watch how people will diligently observe, study, even become obsessed about everything else -- and miss this. We are happy to recognize the archetypal reality of anything at all, except ourselves. There is really no excuse for forgetting that the ancient Greeks in their wisdom had a single word for us as humans: anthropos, which includes woman as well as man. And you only have to look back to the Gnostics to find the plainest accounts and descriptions of anthropos in the fullness of its primordial, archetypal reality."° This is the hidden, unspoken danger. Even the most enlight- ened of Jungians can avoid every other danger to the best of their ability -- and forget the danger of identifying with being a human being. The story happens to be just the same as it almost always turns out to be in the famous fairy tales or legends or myths. One fights so bravely and so hard against the threats and dangers coming from every possible direction but never manages to see the closest, and greatest, threat of all. Jung himself of course was very quick to recognize the ever-present perils of psychological inflation -- of identifying uncritically, unthinkingly, quite unconsciously with the divine archetypes -- and to warn against them. He was only too aware of 20 PART ONE how deceptive the dangers are and how easily we trick ourselves: of how the pious, humble disciple is probably suffering from an even greater inflation and is even more puffed up than the spiritual master." One only needs to add that when we identify with ourselves as humans, when we accept our oneness with the collective human race, we are suffering the greatest inflation of them all. And what happens when we identify with being a nice, modest, ordinary human being? The answer is very simple: We die. When we live like everyone else, we die like everyone else; start to lose our faculties as we turn sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety; drift off into trivialities and completely forget what life is all about." This, when everything has been taken into account and restored to its right place, is the price of identifying with the archetype of the human being. In other words, as the great ancient Greek mystics and phi- losophers I often will be referring to understood so well, there is absolutely nowhere protected or secure. There is no safe ground anywhere -- and precisely where we think is safest is the most dangerous place to be. But the other side to this, as Jung was neither the first nor the last to realize, is that what seems to be far too risky is where our real salvation lies." There is an underlying problem here: a huge problem that can be summarized very easily. In essence, it has to do with the progressive domestication of Jung's image, wisdom, discoveries. And this is where we have to get a few things straight because there are some facts many people would be only too happy to forget. Carl Gustav Jung lived an extremely strange, not to mention crazy life behind the scenes. Because of who he was, as well as his active work and interests, he constantly found himself surrounded by archetypal energies. There were even times in his life when he deliberately invoked them. For him, the need to hold on tight to at least some semblance of sanity when challenged from every side by just the opposite was much more than a theoretical requirement. It was the most urgent, pressing necessity. And the threat of total madness was, to him, something palpably real. Needless to say, there are plenty of Jung experts who collectively rally round to protect him -- or, rather, protect themselves -- by insisting that the wise man never came anywhere close to going mad. But the hollowness of their chorus speaks far louder than the reasoned implausibility of their words. 22 PART ONE In fact all they manage to show is how little they really know. And over thirty years ago someone vastly more familiar than any of them with the actual, lived experience of insanity not only documented Jung's steady journey of descent to "the brink of madness". He also documented how carefully Jung's students, family, followers covered up what happened during the most intense and formative times of his life by creating a pious fiction that bears no resemblance to the reality." A lot has happened, though, in the period since R.D. Laing wrote down his observations. New evidence and documents have come to light -- including the famous Red book Jung started working on while still in his thirties, straight after his break with Freud -- which are so graphic that quite frankly one would have to be a little crazy to want to minimize the intensity of his intimate encounters with insanity. We now have Jung's own account of how he literally had to cling on to the table in front of him to stop himself from falling apart. Of course anyone can read such details and forget them straight away: intellectuals will always have the marvel- lous ability to make anything mean no less, or more, than they want. And perhaps only another person who also has been forced to hold on to reality by grabbing at a piece of furniture will appreciate exactly what kind of states Jung was grappling with." There are undeniably the best of personal, as well as profes- sional, reasons for wanting to isolate Jung from the stigma of madness or near madness and keep him safe from both. After all, this kind of protectionism has had a long and active history. Until the Red book, and other material, began becoming available people mainly had to resort to the sophisticated process of censoring Jung's own words behind the scenes. Now other methods of protecting him, just as sophisticated, have to be found. MYSTICAL FOOL 23 But the truth is that to try and defend him like this is not to add to his stature at all -- only to diminish it." Madness happens to be a primordial phenomenon very closely associated with those same ancient western philosophers and mystics I will be evoking throughout this book. At the same time, as Jung's English translator noted with rare insight, it happens to be no less closely associated with the traditional figure of the indigenous medicine man or shaman. The unenviable discipline of first encountering, then finding ways of controlling, insanity is always essential for reconnecting the world of the human to the world of the sacred. But it also is a path fraught with risk and danger that demands superhuman strength. And anyone is a fool who tries to emphasize the element of control at the expense of the insanity."" Right at the core of Jung's life and experience, easily visible although tempting enough to ignore, lies an awareness that one comes face to face with the reality of the sacred not through sanity but in the terrifying depths of madness. And there -- in the confrontation with madness -- is where our normal, collective sanity is seen for the even more horrifying insanity that it really is. Then, every fixed idea one ever had about anything comes permanently crashing down; and the search begins to find some language that can say what everybody thirsts for but almost nobody wants to hear.'® The realizations involved here are something so pure they can never be duplicated in any paid-up system of training. Whatever one might like to believe, or make others believe, there is no imitating Jung's experiences; no faking them. And this is what will always separate him even from the best-trained Jungian. To Jung himself, inner realities like the archetype of a man's feminine spirit or anima were not just 24 PART ONE handy concepts to appeal to or throw around whenever needed. They were direct, unmediated discoveries that at times almost cost him his life. So in his raw encounters with the unconscious it meant something intensely real for him to have to keep repeating: "On absolutely no account must I identify with that archetype which is about to take me over." [This happens to be quite different, though, from the situation where someone thinks: "Oh, there is not so much to worry about because | have in my pocket Jung's sensible warnings to keep a good distance from all those dangerous divine archetypes and not get anywhere too close. Everything will stay calm and professional because he gave us the basic guidelines we need to protect ourselves collectively in advance. We may have our thrills and moments of excitement, some victories, even a ruffled feather or two. But it will all be just fine because we are always moving forwards, progress after progress, on Jung's broadly reassuring shoulders." Then -- just like any other human being watching television or eating dinner -- we sit comfortably in our archetypal mediocrity, our archetypal complacency, our archetypal conformity. Above all, we think we can magically confine the terrifying reality of the sacred to some separate place or room. In other words we have divided ourselves off for a hundred good reasons, without even noticing it, from the divine. And this is really what I would like to talk about: the hubris, the inflation, the insanity of separating ourselves from the sacred. Earlier I mentioned the uncomfortable process of being stopped from speaking or appearing in public by nothing more solid than dreams. There is a fair chance that anyone who has been forced to withdraw like this will have learned at least a little about what Henry Corbin, on the basis of his own experience, called "the inestimable virtues of silence". And included in those virtues is, rather paradoxically, the inestimable virtue of speech -- because only an intimate familiarity with silence can allow us to touch, then become familiar with, the root of words. In fact the first thing we forget when talking all the time is that speech is a privilege, not the right which our superficial minds so wrongly assume it to be. Speech, as every sacred tradi- tion remembers, is among the purest of divine gifts. That makes it extremely powerful. And this is where things become very serious because it means words have been entrusted to us as something to be extremely careful with. Like breaths, there is only a finite amount of words we are able to speak in a lifetime. We are not given enough that we can afford to waste them or play around, so we need to choose them with a great deal of care. Once they have been released, at a given moment and for a certain purpose, they are gone. The energy behind them will never be available for another purpose or another time. 26 PART ONE And if we are going to use words to speak about the sacred -- in other words, if we are going to make the special kind of effort needed to return them consciously to their source -- then there is the constant question of exactly what to say as well as precisely how to say it. One other aspect of the same process that has to be learned is how to suffer. This too can be immensely difficult to under- stand because, at least at first sight, it has nothing to do with the psychological or physical suffering each of us experiences as a person. In today's world suffering has come to be treated as a highly individualized affair. You suffer, I suffer, for an endless list of theoretically specifiable reasons. And then civilization rushes in with its fixes, all its sanitizing cures. But most people are far too frightened to ask -- and ask with their whole being rather than out of rhetorical cleverness or curiosity -- what kind of sanitization is possible in a world which itself is insane, is completely out of balance. The truth is that beyond our personal sufferings lies another type of suffering: a suffering so horrific that anyone unfortunate, or fortunate, enough to encounter it would dearly love to be able to avoid it and be rid of it. There is no explaining that suffering; neatly mapping it out; softening the sharpness of its edges which are enough to drive anyone crazy. But to get rid of it would be the greatest possible disaster. This is the suffering of experiencing how insanely and unsustainably selfish we have become as aculture, how unbearably forgetful -- and of realizing that there always have to be a few people who through their conscious suffering are willing to balance the selfishness and foolishness and forgetfulness bearing down on the world we live in. MYSTICAL FOOL 27 The fact that here lies a crucial aspect of Jung's own work can seem hard to believe nowadays, considering all the ways it supposedly has been developed and practised and carried forward. But this happens to be perfectly true. Even his insistence that, far from wanting to put a stop to people's suffering, his real wish was to help them suffer consciously can be easy enough to forget. There is almost nobody, though, who cares to note the lengths Jung himself felt pulled to go to so that he could suffer consciously for the sake of the sacred -- "because I wanted God to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason more than God's secret intentions". Of course he hardly expected anyone to take this kind of talk seriously, which to a certain extent explains why he qualified it straight away as just the words of a "mystical fool". What makes things so intensely troubling is that the selfishness and unconsciousness in question, the vanity of all the reasonableness Jung is referring to, are never only haunting the most likely places; the obvious places; the predictable ones. That would be far too straightforward and easy. They are everywhere but, above all, where you would least expect: in the brightest philosophical ideas, the noblest spiritual thoughts. They tend to gather and flock around accepted concepts which sound so innocent and self-evident, so plausible and sen- sible, nobody thinks to question them. They attach themselves to the unshakeable convictions about ourselves that we picked up as children and keenly hold on to; the firmest of beliefs about our future, present, past. And this applies also to our concepts of healing. In fact it applies even to the most basic language we use for healing -- like the simple, familiar word "therapy". 28 PART ONE Nowadays just the mention of therapy is enough to conjure up ideas of psychotherapy, physiotherapy, all the different ways I can be helped to get better. But this is not how things used to be. Originally, herapeia in ancient Greek meant caring. And when you go back in time as far as you can, you come to one very specific and constant expression. Zherapeia theén meant attending to the divine, caring for the gods and serving them, doing what humans ought to do to make sure the gods are all right." Then something quite interesting happens. There is a particular place where Plato focuses his thoughts on therapeia theén, caring for the gods. And basically he argues: "Care for the gods? Why on earth would humans want to care for the gods when the gods are so much greater and better than us that there is absolutely nothing they could need? It might be nice for people, if they really want, to make a little gesture by paying the gods a bit of attention. But to feel one is doing something useful: that wouldn't just be pretty stupid. It would be utterly ridiculous.'" There is no need to say too much about the enlightened rationality here, which from any reasonable perspective all sounds exactly the way it should. And so far we have only come as far as Plato -- his greatest disciple, Aristotle, is still waiting at the next turn in the road. This is the way it works, though: one more milestone in the human mind's adventure of submitting everything to the criteria of its own reasoning, just another pace in separating people from the sacred. As I mentioned earlier, words matter. In spite of all the ready justifications and superficial rationalizations, they have a significance and importance far beyond what our reasonable minds want to tell us. Always there are the consequences. MYSTICAL FOOL 29 Once something like these thoughts of Plato, however original or unoriginal, has been put into words there is no going back. And from a deeper perspective nothing could be more disastrous because his argument is just another nail in the coffin of our relation to the sacred -- is one more step in articulating the unconscious attitude that says "Let's make sure the divine takes good care of us. But as for finding what, in reality, the divine might possibly need: let it look after itself." From here onwards one can sit back and watch how the idea of looking after the gods starts, almost as if by magic, vanishing from the western world. It gets pushed more and more to the fringes of ancient culture until even the notion of actually caring for the gods ends up being dismissed as something altogether alien and foreign: superstitious, barbaric." And those consequences extended far beyond Greece or Rome. For thousands of years Christians have flocked to church not to look after God; only to check that God is looking after them. The real motive is hardly to take care of Christ but to go on making quite sure every week he is still alive enough, suffering enough for our sins, to keep on attending to us in our absent-mindedness and self-absorption. Of course there have always been the exceptions among Christian mystics. And I have seen for myself in rural Greece how old women go on caring for the icons inside the small churches as if they are caring for Christ and his mother in person. A sense still stays alive across different communities here and there, just before they are crushed by the ruthless forces of western progress, of what it means to care for the divine. But in general the one thing civilized Christians have learned to care about is how God, at least what they think of as God, is going to care for humans. And now it never for a moment occurs to us that the 30 PART ONE divine might be suffering, aching from our neglect; that the sacred desperately longs for our attention far more than we in some occasional, unconscious spasm might feel a brief burst of embarrassed longing for it. Rationality, spirituality, therapy of every possible shape and colour: the truth nowadays is very simple. They are all about me and me and me. And the more tricks we create for helping to make some connection with the sacred -- the flattering idea of co-thinking or co-creating with the divine, of looking to find the gods inside us, learning how to tame the divine archetypes so they will make us happier and more fulfilled -- the less anyone understands what attitude and effort are really demanded if the divine is going to receive the help it needs from us. The gods, if they still exist, are just here to give us our therapy because therapy is now for us. God forbid it would be for the gods. The one tiny technicality we forgot is this: that whenever we take everything for ourselves we end up with absolutely nothing. First we have to know how to care for the gods if the gods are going to care for us. There were other consequences to Plato's reasoning, too. Whatever we like to think about our own intelligence, the gods are not fools; and even if nobody pays much attention to the events once set in motion, they do. It needed a while -- as always -- for people to start noticing, but eventually the reports began flowing in. Plutarch, a famous Platonist from around the time of Christ and also a priest at the Delphic temple of Apollo, took the trouble to note how "oracles which once used to speak with many voices are now completely finished, like springs that have run dry". He went on to talk about whole regions where "a great drought of prophecy has covered the land" because most of the old oracle sites "have been taken over either by silence or by utter devastation". A couple of centuries later Porphyry, another well-known Platonist, quoted at length from two oracles essentially repeating the same message: it was already finished. One of them describes how the earth has swallowed back into her depths the thousands of oracle sites she had allowed to exist on her surface. The other says that now "there is no reviving the speaking voice" of the Delphic oracle which had become weaker, and dimmer, until finally it was locked up by "the keys of unprophesying silence'. 32 PART ONE And then there is the notorious "last oracle" ever given at Delphi which, with simple dignity, announces that for Apollo everything is over. "He no longer has a speaking spring: even the talking water has come to an end.""* Predictably it was militant Christians who helped shape the convenient narrative that all the old, primitive oracles had been silenced thanks to the welcome arrival of Christianity. But this is just religious opportunism at its best, and is completely to miss the larger picture -- because the Platonists who so dutifully reported on the changes were much more than innocent witnesses. With the flood of their words and writings, the endless stream of their philosophizing and theologizing, their constant theorizing and moralizing about the gods, they were intimately implicating themselves in what was happening. If the gods as living realities had mattered to them as much as they liked to believe, they might have done something genuinely noble: might have sunk into silence in sympathy and solidarity so they could be there together with the gods, could help them, support them. Instead, they kept themselves busy papering over the cracks with cosmetic solutions while thinking and talking and writing without a break. And it never occurred to them that the gods might have had to go silent precisely because of all this human droning, because of so many people claiming to know more about the gods than the gods themselves. It's a very common mistake and, psychologically, one of the easiest of all to make. We are so taken with the familiar sound of our voices that we much prefer to talk on and on about the sacred instead of allowing the sacred a chance to speak: instead of giving it the freedom to share, in its selfless ways, the secret of its own intentions. I remember once, as a teenager on my own, walking across Tunisia. A car came along and the driver stopped to offer me a MYSTICAL FOOL 33 ride; he turned out to be the country's leading psychologist. He took me back to his family estate and, as the sun began to set, told me there would be a very rare gathering of Sufis starting soon out in the countryside that same evening. He offered to take me: I said that would be wonderful. "And before we leave", he mentioned, "I have a home video I made of a similar gathering that I am going to show you." I explained, as politely and firmly as I could, that this sounded ever so fascinat- ing but why spend time watching the video when we could be experiencing the actual reality? He insisted, and by the time the film had finished the gathering was already over. The quality of the video had been so poor one could hardly see a thing. This is how the human mind works: what we make, what we think, what we say, is far more important than any reality beyond or behind us. We were so busy with our flimsy substitutes that, before we can even register what happened, the moment of opportunity has passed. That reality is already gone. The Platonists had their very intelligent and reasonable strategies, then, for filling the void left by the departure of the gods. Now, naturally, we have ours -- much more advanced, of course, far more sophisticated than theirs. And no strategy can possibly be better suited for us western- ers, more pampering of our egos, than the evolutionary one. The gods left because we no longer need them: we have moved up and on. It was high time we were starting to stand on our own feet, take back responsibility for our lives. We had to begin making rational decisions for ourselves instead of depending on some oracle or divinity -- although, needless to say, it's always in our power to bring back the gods at any stage if we ever want to. As a matter of fact, so some stories go, these changes were overdue because the moment had arrived for everyone to grow 34 PART ONE more conscious. And all that's needed, now, is for intuitives to come along to console us with wonderful stories about where everything is heading: the fantastic human adventures in unfold- ing consciousness that lie ahead." The grim reality happens to be a little different, though. As Jung saw, and often tried to emphasize, certainly we can look back and see changes or developments here and there across the last two thousand years. It would be incredible if we couldn't. But to suppose humanity, with all its pious hopes and illusions and aspirations, has made any real or fundamental progress: this is only another illusion because the problems we face now are just the same as they were two thousand years ago. And we are just as unprepared to face them." Culturally, we are so obsessed with the restless myth of constant evolution -- material progress, spiritual progress -- that we fail to see what fools we make of ourselves or how blinded we are by our obsession. At times, to be sure, Jung could appear to be going along with this grand mythology. He could seem to be endorsing wholeheartedly our western "cult of progress"; reinforcing the "illusion" of our civilized triumphs. But both "cult" and "illusion" are his own words. And often he acts exactly like the Presocratic philosophers, thousands of years before him, who realized that the only way to commu- nicate anything at all to people was by speaking their illusory language and sharing their illusory words."' The basic truth was that for him our much vaunted civiliza- tion and consciousness are the most fragile, delicate, ambiguous achievements. This is why -- when confronted as a man of science with the infallible dogma, which somehow still finds a place in the popular imagination and even in the minds of prominent Jungians, that not only civilization but also consciousness must of course both be evolving -- he continually found himself forced to hesitate. MYSTICAL FOOL 35 And instead of agreeing, as any respectable scientist would automatically have been expected to do, he would use the sharp edge of irony or the darkest possible humour to question every- thing."® Here, too, one could say he happened to be well ahead of his time. After all: in an essential sense he was only anticipating the growing awareness among leading-edge scientists today that our human species has been degenerating for thousands of years -- physically, mentally, genetically. But it does take time for facts to find some small place among all the paradigms and dreams of evolution." And there is also much more to the matter than that. In fact it's only by going back far beyond the alchemists, even beyond the Gnostics who attracted so much of his interest, that one can really start to see why Jung's questionings and hesitations were so justified. We still have the writings of the famous "Presocratic" phi- losophers who, two and a half thousand years ago, analyzed the human condition in searing and terrifying detail. But the way they described people then -- hopelessly deaf and blind to reality, arrogant and confused, superficial and living their lives in a total dream, devoid of the slightest genuine consciousness and begging to be deceived, trapped by their own fantasies but imagining they are free -- is not just some record of how things once used to be. It's a perfectly accurate portrayal of the human condition right now. Because they understood so well the timeless intricacies of the human mind, they not only were able to predict with the finest precision how their own teachings would be misunder- stood and misinterpreted by intellectuals like Plato or Aristotle a century later. They were even able to anticipate the way their 36 PART ONE teachings would be twisted and distorted by the smartest of scholars down to the present day. For them, real awareness was the rarest achievement imagin- able. 'Io them there was no greater miracle than how humans can manage to blunder through the whole of what they call life in utter unconsciousness while all the time dreaming that they are aware. And their accounts of the human condition are uncannily accurate accounts of us, today, because there is no difference whatsoever between people's unconsciousness now and then.*° A lot appears to have happened in the last few thousand years. Great philosophers came. Christ came. Television came. And nothing changed. We may have a few more tricks up our sleeves now along with some extra gadgets in our hands; but in terms of consciousness and conscience, hypocrisy and brutality, love and morality, at the very best we are just the same. As for all our proud ideas about evolution -- they are simply our best excuse for running from the reality of ourselves. Of course we can go on thinking we are free to believe the lovely fantasies put out by people stuck in their throats and brains: their noble and bright ideas about where humanity is certainly going. The trouble is that intuitions and intuitives are sometimes right, often wrong. And the only way of actually learning the truth about the past and the future for ourselves is when the spark of conscious- ness we are has been rammed, inch by painful inch, right down into the silent depths of our entrails. In the darkest past it was traditional when starting to speak, or coming together with others, to invoke the presence of the sacred. Perhaps you will be able to sense that this is what, in my own way, I have been making the effort to do. But I also need to make the point quite clear that invoking the sacred means invoking what's really sacred -- not what might have been sacred for some other person or people hundreds, even thousands, of years ago. We have to start by invoking what's sacred for us. Of course we are free to complicate things and get into the messiest of arguments by insisting we are not at all sure what that would be. The simple truth is, though, that we all know perfectly well what's sacred to us; and have for a very long time. Ever since we were children we have been able to sense what's sacred in a landscape -- the sudden rush of birds in the morning, the smell and touch of a flower petal, watching sunlight make the trees or grass so luminously and shockingly green. We all know what's sacred right from the beginning. No one ever has to teach it to a baby or child: they know just as we knew. They can find the sacred in a forgotten little back alley some- where. They'll find it even in a weed, on a piece of moss. But this leads straight to the real question that needs to be asked. I have to admit it's the last possible subject I would want 38 PART ONE to talk about, although at times like this there is no choice. And here is where things become really difficult because in terms of the West, in terms of this strange culture we have created and made our own, it's not enough to look inside ourselves and see what we can see of the sacred. We also have to search ourselves and discover what it is inside each of us that -- individually, but also collectively as a part of this western civilization -- is hell-bent on destroying the sacred. This is the question which has become so scary and also, for the sake of being truthful with ourselves as well as honest with each other, so necessary. To be real about the sacred is to see not just what inside us is not sacred -- but what it is inside us that's against the sacred. What is it in our civilization that's systematically, year after year and minute after minute, mile after mile and inch by inch, gutting everything sacred it touches: devouring it inside ourselves at the same time as irresistibly, inevitably, eating it up outside us in the beauty of landscape and nature? When I was a teenager I often would hitchhike down from London to Stonehenge, sometimes in the middle of the night. And it was so simple there. I could creep in and sit quietly under- neath the old stones, meditate, stay as long as I needed. Then, after | learned to drive and came back years later, aside from all the extra rows of barbed wire it was almost as if you had to buy a bunch of postcards just to be able to get somewhere close. And this is simply a symbol of what we do. Whatever hasn't already been wiped out -- but by some miracle happens to have been preserved -- now has to be preserved from us and put as far away as possible out of reach. There is no trusting ordinary human beings with the sacred, with what used to be sacred. Then there are the times my wife and I have spent in North America. I can still vividly remember neighbours where we MYSTICAL FOOL 39 used to live, off the coast of Canada at the heart of what was once a sacred island, cutting down the enormous fir trees that held up the whole balance of nature for the sake of making a few dollars; the local government in New Mexico, bent on building a huge road right through the middle of inconceivably powerful petroglyphs that had been carved into the rocks tens of thousands of years ago; the magnificently brooding nature in North Carolina which had turned its face away from humans and hidden its deepest secrets because of what it had to witness the white man do to his black slaves, but above all to the Native Americans. And Switzerland is where I used to come, together with my family, when I was a young boy -- the exquisite houses with their beautiful fagades and painted shutters, flowers outside, merging effortlessly into the landscape. Now, all you see everywhere is lumps of concrete because this is the only thing people know how to build in our progressive society: concrete blocks. There is no end to the stories anybody could tell; and there is no need to ask if someone doesn't know what | mean, because everyone does. But the question that does have to be asked is: what is it that's happening? What is this huge tide of so-called progress that's sweeping everywhere and pushing everything, everybody, on? We walk and watch. We are bound to notice, maybe sadly as we get older, how much things keep changing from the ways they were before. And we just do our best to make do -- to justify it all as livable, bearable. Here and there we'll do our best to compensate: put a little Buddha statue in our garden, drive an environmentally friendly car, even join a protest. But each of us, deep down inside, realizes what we are up against and knows very well the tide will never be turned back like that. 40 PART ONE Perhaps now and then, as we look around at the wrecking of nature and the sacred, we might be caught off guard and surprised by a tiny voice in our head that quietly asks: "But hasn't it all been done rather well?" Especially when we are tired, it can feel so much easier to rationalize everything rather than go on feeling at odds with the hard realities all around us; to do a few calculations and count up the new advantages, benefits, blessings. And there is a certain calm reassurance that comes from joining in with the collective explanations -- except that none of them ever comes anywhere close to being an explanation which is authentically real. We can try blaming the population explosion. That's true to an extent, but barely scratching the surface. We can put the blame on technology. That's an effect of the tide, not its cause. We can feel justifiably horrified at the diabolical twistings of Christian doctrine that end up claiming Christ abolished the sacredness of land and nature when, by dying on the cross, he left the human heart as the only sanctified place on earth.*! There is an answer, though. It's the simplest of explanations that takes us back even beyond the beginnings of Christianity. And its simplicity must be the reason why our infinitely complicated minds have overlooked it. The answer is that every civilization has a sacred purpose. But we have forgotten ours. And it's because of this forgetting that everything around -- as well as inside -- us has gone so terribly wrong. It was a huge surprise for me, at age seventeen, being forced by some mysterious but irresistible impulse to go back to the ancient Greeks to find out where western philosophy began. This was nothing at all, though, compared to the shock of being drawn to study in detail the surviving words of the earliest Greek philosophers -- the so-called Presocratics -- only to discover that the modern accounts of who they were and what they did are total fictions. Nothing, for the writers of those modern accounts, is sacred. If mistranslation of the ancient texts is needed to bring them into line with present-day assumptions, then they'll be mistranslated. If mistranslation isn't enough, and the only trick guaranteed to silence their message is to change the ancient Greek texts themselves, that's exactly what will be done. But once you understand the motives and methods behind all this nonsense, the how as well as the why, it's not so hard to put that little bag of tricks aside. The first of the early philosophers I encountered was called Empedocles. And over a period of time he demonstrated to me in every conceivable way that nothing could be further from the truth than to dismiss people like him as the primitive thinkers we imagine them to be. 42 PART ONE These weren't some childish intellectuals, trying to pass themselves off as creators of the ridiculously complicated mental games later thinkers would soon start playing in their bizarre pursuits of wisdom. On the contrary: they happened to be great mystics already in possession of a simple wisdom that was as practical, and focused, as it was subtle. They included immensely powerful beings who -- in harmony with others, in the deepest coordination -- consciously worked together bringing a whole civilization into being. These were people who laid the foundations of philosophy, of science, logic and cosmology, law and medicine, healing and education by fetching the seeds of all those disciplines from a different reality that the would-be guardians of our culture now don't even know exists. They would go into another state of consciousness and bring their gifts into this world from the world of the sacred so that a fresh civilization could begin. And yes, one of the many things this means is that even western science itself had a sacred source. But don't think for a moment that what I am offering here is some kind of mystical interpretation. Quite to the contrary, it happens to be the only account capable of doing full justice -- without any arbitrary distortions or wilful neglect -- to the ancient evidence and documentation. All those hard-headed rationalists who for centuries have looked down on mystics as foolish creatures, divorced from reality, have got everything wrong. It's they, themselves, who have lost any touch with the mystical reality that their science and their rationalism originally were meant to be.°*? Simply to get a glimpse of this turns everything on its head and inside out. Then for the first time you start to observe and really understand the process of history, of culture, of civilizations, MYSTICAL FOOL 43 just the same as if you are watching a plant; a flower; any natural object. After all, every culture is precisely what its name says it is: a part of nature, something organic needing to be tended and cul- tivated according to principles only planters and farmers know. To the mind that tricks itself into thinking it sees everything in rational terms, nothing could sound more nonsensical. And this is a crucial part of the problem because we take our familiar ways of perceiving so much for granted that we completely forget what lies at the root of our own thoughts -- not to mention our senses. Perhaps it will be best if I just give the example of someone closely related to Empedocles. His name was Parmenides, and he is still remembered in the West as the inventor of reason or reasoning; as the ultimate founder and father of logic. But in spite of his reputation, regardless of the hundreds of thousands of pages later philosophers have written around and about him, we have no idea any more of what logic for Parmenides really was. Exactly the same as Empedocles, he put everything he had to say into poetry -- into an incantatory text full of the strangest details and repetitions, a poem that used the ancient techniques of magic for carrying the listener or reader into another state of consciousness. And originally this was the purpose of logic in the West, just as it was the original purpose of philosophy and science and culture as a whole: to take us back to the sacred. Parmenides paid the greatest attention, using all the appro- priate language of his time, to explaining what happened when he was carried as an initiate along the path of the sun and down into the world of the dead; to describing how he had been given the gift of logic by the goddess Persephone, queen of the underworld, who greeted him down there in the darkness at the roots of existence. 44 PART ONE And, in origin, this was the whole point of logic: to allow what had been received from the divine to complete its perfect circle by taking us straight back to the divine world it had come from. That was how logic had been given. It wasn't logic as some dry discipline to tire our brains out and make us lose our ways in endless thinking. It was a logic given through visions and dreams, a gift to plunge us into the depths of ourselves and strip us of all our thoughts so it can train us to become conscious of the sacred reality at the heart of everything -- ever-present, totally aware of itself without the slightest shading or distance, the living power behind the whole of existence. There is nothing here even remotely similar to the kind of logic inflicted on children at school or whenever some person, far older and taller than ourselves, accused us of acting or talking illogically. Neither does it come anywhere close to the mechanistic accounts of it by writers like Nietzsche or Heidegger, who were only dressing up in brighter clothes the fashionable mistakes of their time.*° And the reason for this is very simple. In our progressive sophistication and evolving civilization we have wiped out any trace of the truth that logic, along with everything else, once had its sacred place and purpose. And once the awareness of that has gone, everything else goes wrong. As for all the learned mumbo jumbo which has been repeated century after century by academics, theologians, esotericists, about the existence of some fundamental contrast between limited human logic and the divine mystery of revelation -- this is just one more sign of how completely and utterly we have forgotten that logic in its origin was the most perfect example of revelation.** And anyone who looks closely at what this means will start to see it's far more than a question of history, or philosophy, or literature. MYSTICAL FOOL 45 As a matter of fact this isn't even about ideas. It's about us; about the lives we live, or try to live; about the deepest purpose of our existence. It also is a constant reminder that truth has to be found not by taking the easy route of flying off to heaven in some dazzlingly brilliant blaze of light but by following the path of the sun down into the depths of night where everything, including the darkest reaches of ourselves, is connected to the sacred. These were the famous laws of logic that Parmenides inserted into the world as a seed, a gift for western culture, twenty-five hundred years ago. Like so many other lawgivers in that part of the world he belonged to, he made it quite clear none of these laws is to be changed. Nothing should be altered. Nothing must be added. Nothing was meant to be taken away; and the reason for this, too, is very simple. Just like other lawbringers -- or prophets -- of that time, he was bringing his laws as a message directly from another world.» This all became as clear as day to me in the 1970s during my years of research at Cambridge University. For me, too, it was a lonely path as I followed the thread of Parmenides' own words that led far away from everything anyone would even remotely associate with logic. Instead, to my growing amazement it plunged me straight into a world not of rational thought but of prophecy and inspira- tion; of ecstasy and other states of consciousness; of incantations and the use of repetition; of deliberately accessing the realm of visions and dreams through the practice of incubation or lying down to meditate in dark places. It was only many years later that, all alone in a London library one Saturday afternoon, I happened to come across a large book that had just been published. When I opened it I realized, to my even greater amazement, it contained the results 46 PART ONE of archaeological work which without my knowledge had been going on for years at Parmenides' old hometown called Velia in southern Italy. Whole series of inscriptions, including one for Parmenides himself, had been found along with a set of statues all carved out of blocks of marble. And together they were linking him with a tradition of inspired prophecy; with the mastery of ecstasy and different states of consciousness; with the use of incantations and deliberate repetition of words and sounds; with the practice of incubation by lying down in dark places to access the world of visions and dreams.*° Every detail I had deduced, one by one, from the surviving text of Parmenides' poem was confirmed with the most haunt- ing and striking precision by physical pieces of stone hidden for centuries inside the earth. But of course to see the significance of that confirmation means having a pair of eyes -- which is very far from common in a field where professional scholars dedicate themselves to the collective pursuit of blindness. I remember once giving a lecture, to a group of international specialists who had gathered in All Souls College at Oxford Uni- versity, about the self-evident links between these archaeological discoveries and Parmenides' own poem. After my talk, the most famous scholars in the room came up to me together and said indignantly: "But we are philosophers! We deal with ideas! Why on earth would we bother ourselves about lumps of stone?" And that's fair enough, except when what was carved into the marble happens to be about ourselves -- or rather is ourselves. On an obvious level the inscriptions and statues are present- ing a lineage of prophet -- healers whose wisdom was transmitted, by adoptive father to adopted child, from the time of Parmenides down into the Christian era. But on another level they are simply telling the story of our own origins -- together with our destiny. This was the original fragility of western logic and western science -- as flexible as life itself, in their prophetic nature as delicate and frail as a flower. To practise that logic, this science, meant learning how to work with the circlings of the sun and finding how to breathe. It was to sense when to think and when to go still; when to talk, when to go silent. It meant knowing when to lie down to rest, sink into sleep, do nothing. But, naturally, that raises the question of what happened. And the simple answer is to look to the one place whose influence Parmenides and his successors struggled, to the point of death, to protect themselves from: all the questionable grandeur, the intellectual aspirations and military ambitions of ancient Athens.°" Aristotle lived not much more than a hundred years after Parmenides. Like Parmenides, he had what I guess one could call a professional interest in logic. He also showed a particular interest in the subject of prophetic dreams -- of dreams said to be sent by gods to humans to give them the kind of knowledge or guidance they could never discover by themselves. And that interest is, one could say, more than a little inter- esting considering how Parmenides himself had belonged to a prophetic tradition familiar with invoking as well as interpreting the divine guidance offered through visions or dreams. 48 PART ONE A lot can change, though, in the course of a century -- which helps to explain why Aristotle in Athens would choose to use his new-found logical powers to denounce prophetic dreams as fantasies, denounce people who claimed to have prophetic dreams as uneducated idiots, and above all denounce as absurd even the idea that dreams could be sent by the gods. Of course this sounds, now, very modern and very familiar: so familiar, in fact, that there is no stopping academics from praising Aristotle to the heavens for his sophisticated reasoning as well as his brilliant insight on precisely this subject. After all, his reasoning is theirs and theirs is essentially still his. But sometimes it can be useful to preserve a bit of balance -- not to mention a little sanity. So I will give just one token example of Aristotle's brilliant, sophisticated demonstrations that prophetic dreams can't possibly have anything authentic about them. To quote his own proof in his own unforgettable words: it's totally obvious that no gods are involved in sending dreams because, if they were, then "they would only communicate during the daytime and they would only communicate with the wise".*® As for the part here about communicating with the wise, it's best not to waste any precious breath on it -- aside from noting that, in Aristotle's ever so slightly narcissistic mind, wisdom was the exclusive preserve of advanced philosophers like himself or his teacher Plato. And if the gods refused to communicate straight with him, he could be perfectly sure they would never go near anybody else. But as for the part where Aristotle imagines he can lay down some rigid rule about gods only communicating during the daytime: this is where anyone could wonder what on earth is going on. MYSTICAL FOOL 49 To solve the riddle isn't so hard, though; and to follow the knotted thread of his logic needs no more than the slightest familiarity with the writings of his famous teacher. Plato was very clear, especially near the end of his life, about what a wise person's attitude should be to night and night-time. According to him it would be wrong even to waste a moment's thought on describing night, or night's darkness, as something inferior to daytime. For him the fact of the matter was that they have absolutely no virtue at all, no presence, of their own because they are nothing but the absence of day. And what this means in practice is that any conscious, responsible human wanting to live an intelligent life would be well advised to drown out each night with mental activities by squeezing into it as many daytime tasks as possible -- because "while asleep no one is worth anything". In other words: Parmenides' emphasis on the unique access offered to the heart of wisdom by letting oneself be carried into the darkest, most feminine, most unconscious depths of night is not only ignored. It's methodically, systematically excluded.* And it's exactly the same story all over again when Plato finds himself having to explain why the supreme group of over- seers or lawmakers he envisaged for his model state would need to meet, each single night, "from earliest dawn until sunrise'. In the eyes of the older mystics and philosophers whose tracks he is following very closely here -- as he so often used to do -- no other time of day could possibly be more logical because this was the most sacred moment of all. It was that timeless, magical instant when the bringers of divine laws are able to fetch their gifts of justice and rightness out into the light from the darkest depths of the night. But Plato was far too bright a thinker to accept light's depen- dence on night or its indebtedness to darkness. And so he came 50 PART ONE up with a reason of his own, the smartest justification he could think of, for deciding on such a highly unusual time. "This", he explains, "is the time that will allow everyone involved the greatest leisure and freedom from all their other activities and commitments." Once again, Plato has worked his peculiar inverted alchemy. The choice had nothing to do with the sacredness of that dawn- ing transition, so infinitely significant and subtle, out from darkness into day. And certainly it had nothing whatsoever to do with the fact that ancient tradition connected the source of prophetic wisdom -- as well as lawgiving -- with the ambiguous, feminine, hidden realms of darkness. It was just about re-arranging one's hectic calendar to avoid scheduling conflicts." Simply to touch on such subjects is one of the most difficult things to do, because no sensible person is even meant to mention them. It's like scratching at the belly of reasonableness; systematically unravelling the myth of rationality that took hundreds and thousands of years to build up. As for Plato, of course he has been turned into one of the greatest intellectual and spiritual heroes in the West. And it's understandable enough that people coming across his writings are often overwhelmed by their beauty. What's a little harder to understand is that their real beauty is above all the beauty of the landscape he had been allowed to wander through, crushing the plants and flowers in the process. Appearances can be very deceptive. The more one grows familiar with what came before him, the more possible it is to appreciate that his magnificent myths aren't really his at all -- except in the sense that he took them, without any formal acknowledgement, from the followers of Pythagoras who were gracious enough to host him on his visits to Italy and Sicily. MYSTICAL FOOL 51 I should add, though, that this was hardly such a big deal for the Pythagoreans themselves. Evocative myths about the soul and its fate happened to be the most openly accessible, least valued or esoteric aspect of their teachings.*! But even in the process of taking these myths over Plato did a splendid job of misunderstanding them, rationalizing and trivializing essential details, gently jumbling things up. Constantly in his artful writings he changed what wasn't meant to be changed, modified what ought to have been left alone; cleverly transferred to his own philosophy the language of mysteries and initiation which once had belonged to the sacred, to another world." Today, though, everything I have just described is fine and perfect: altogether commendable. That's progress. It's innovation. This is the way everyone does business in our restless, egoistic, well-trained culture of thieves. But the fact is that, in mentioning these things, I am not talking as a part of the world Plato or Aristotle helped to create. I am speaking on behalf of the world they almost destroyed. We have slipped step by step into hell without ever noticing it, and should try to see why. If Plato was an accomplished philosopher in the modern sense, he was far more accomplished as a producer of outright fictions. And this mattered in ways that, because we have made our nests and homes in those fictions, are a little hard to grasp. Now we are perfectly used to being surrounded, even smothered, by facts and factuality. But, back then, reality hadn't quite detached itself yet from myth. And this meant that the process of making history was still a relatively simple matter of writing it -- rather than having to go to the tedious trouble of trying to rewrite it. All in all it was an extremely creative time, depending of course on how you chose to use or misuse the opportunities you had been given.* In one of those imaginary dialogues that Plato became so famous for creating, he invented the fanciful character he refers to with deliberate vagueness as a stranger visiting from Velia. Velia just so happened to be the name of Parmenides' home in southern Italy -- of that very same town where the prophetic tradition flowing from him as founding father went on being quietly transmitted, generation to generation, adoptive father to adopted son, for over five hundred years. MYSTICAL FOOL 53 And with the help of this background you'll be able to appreciate what Plato was doing when, in a flight of imagination, he decided to put into the mouth of his fictitious visitor from Velia the idea that it's time to murder "father Parmenides". To state the situation with the crudeness needed: Plato is doing the very same thing with this Velian tradition that he also did to it in other fictional dialogues he wrote. Deviously, insidiously, manipulatively, he insinuates him- self into a role that isn't his; inserts himself uninvited into an initiatory lineage he doesn't belong to; systematically sets about sabotaging it by destroying it from within. Certainly he puts on a good show of making his imaginary character sound ever so nervous about the whole matter, hesitant to carry through with the murder, reluctant. And the reason he does this is because he absolutely had to. At Athens, just to mention even the thought of committing patricide was considered one of the most atrocious crimes conceivable -- the quintessential offence of inflicting violence on one's ancestors." But behind all the veils of literature, fiction, hesitation, that act of killing father Parmenides was carried out. The murder was done, only to be repeated time after time by scholars whose sole purpose and comfort lie in the world created by that murder. And not many things in our culture are more important than to understand just what it is that Plato killed; how he killed it; why he killed it. As the founder and father of his lineage in Velia, Parmenides had allowed himself to be taken on the most terrifying journey imaginable -- straight down into the underworld, the bowels of all existence, to meet the queen of death. From every normal orsane perspective it was the craziest thing anybody would be willing to do. And it was the most horrifically frightful place anyone would ever want to go. This is why, right down to the present day, there are scholars who instinctively 54 PART ONE try to keep the whole subject of the underworld hidden under wraps: who do anything they can to cover his destination up and pretend it doesn't matter at all where Parmenides might have arrived on his mythical journey. But it could hardly have mattered more. If you were extremely lucky you might make it down in one piece, then even come back alive -- and safe. To anybody else, the underworld was deadly. Here, and nowhere else, is exactly where logic first came from. Logic in its purity, as originally introduced to the West, was the demonstration that nothing can ever change or die. Every single thought or feeling or perception that you imagine you ever thought or felt or perceived still exists, as a total reality, together with every other perception and feeling and thought -- not in some restricted or abstract or qualified sense but in the fullest, most concrete sense imaginable. Everything you thought you'd forgotten even including the thought itself, everything you had tried to push aside, every waking experience together with the most haunting or fondest of dreams, is still alive in this place where everything you thought of as life is already dead and where nothing ever dies. In other words: western logic in its origin was the language, the experience, of the underworld. But that means the only way to understand it is if you are able to go there, is to be taken to the realms of the dead, let your- self be dragged there -- far away from what Parmenides poetically described as the beaten track of humans with all its obsessive distinctions between existent and non-existent, alive or dead. And this is precisely what, if you allow it, his logic still has the power to do. This was Persephone's gift from her place beside the roots of all existence, beyond even life and death: a gift freshly delivered MYSTICAL FOOL 55 by Parmenides, as part of his prophetic message, at the dawn of our western world. Plato, though, was an entirely different kind of fish. Of course he had heard about the Pythagorean discipline of learning to face death before you die; he would even write some inspiring words about it. He was extremely efficient, too, at publishing colourful myths about the underworld. But as for going there -- that was another story altogether. And besides, in the figure of Parmenides he found himself confronted by an inhumanly gigantic problem. Like any intellectual he felt the desperate pressure to think and discriminate and reason. The trouble is that Parmenides' logic in its craziness, its unbroken wholeness, its uncanny still- ness, excludes those frantic human activities right from the start. In other words, his logic was the end of everything we think of as logic -- before logic as we know it had even begun. So, if Plato was going to do what he wanted to do, he really had no choice at all. He would simply have to get rid of Parmenides before Parmenides got rid of him. Through the fictitious voice of his visiting stranger from Velia, he describes exactly what kind of clever mental tricks would be needed to silence the message of the goddess: the tricks of insisting that yes but also no, no but in another sense yes. And he set about killing her message so effectively we don't even have any memory, now, of the fullness that was lost. This is what led to the murder of Parmenides' divine logic, which through its utter stillness is beyond the reach or grasp of human thinking, and to the replacement of logic's sacred laws -- in defiance of all the ancient warnings -- by human reason, by the endless superficiality of its restlessness and questioning, its continuous need to qualify and argue about everything just like some petty lawyer. 56 PART ONE The irony is that Plato was so fascinated with the power of his own thinking he actually believed he had invented something needed; something new. In fact all he had done, though, was make the same old mistake that Parmenides himself had expressly warned against right from the start -- the fatal mistake of constantly qualifying oneself, living as if something is true and real in one sense but in another sense not, just like any other human.*° This is what happens when you think you can improve on laws brought straight and fresh from another world. But there is also a far greater irony than that. At the very beginning of his incantatory poem Parmenides had already described how people who keep on torturing reality like this, breaking it up into tiny pieces with their minds, aren't even living on the surface of the earth as they imagine they are. In fact they are not alive at all. They are just wandering ghosts, drifting backwards and forwards and then around and around -- "twin-heads, knowing nothing as they are carried along in a daze, deaf and blind at the same time" -- down at some lonely but haunted crossroads in the underworld." And this is what happens when you think you can cut hell out of your little, well ordered life. As soon as you believe you have conveniently removed the need to visit hell, the moment you decide you have the right to silence the voice that speaks from the depths of hell, you end up in hell yourself. Or, in other words, one has to make the journey to the underworld to discover everybody is already there. Then there is the madness. Down in the underworld where western logic comes from, where the roots of earth and water and fire and sky merge into a single whole, the entire world as we think we know it with all its imaginary distinctions and divisions disappears. Everything we cling on to, everything we hold important, is gone. And Aristotle was just being true to his usual sensible self when, with more than a little anxiety, he pointed out how utterly unreasonable Parmenides' logic happens to be. He complained that, if taken seriously, such a logic would lead any rational person straight to madness. Or, as he liked to say, anyone refusing to distinguish between ice and fire is not just crazy like any other crazy person -- but is even madder than a madman. This wasn't only Aristotle speaking, though. Through his words you can still hear the kind of heated discussions about logic, or reason, that he along with Plato both found themselves being drawn into during the early days of the new Platonic Academy. The logic presented by Parmenides was a disaster from beginning to end because it wasn't just irrational. It was downright insane." But that's no more than half of the madness; and there is another side to it, too. 58 PART ONE Plato himself exposes it only too well when he has his imaginary stranger from Velia express near panic at the insanity -- the sheer madness -- of being forced to commit patricide by killing "father Parmenides". And there was every good reason for fear considering how no crime was more polluting, or terrifying, in the Athens of Plato's time than the crime of murdering the father. In short: we have all been tricked and deluded into believing that the birth of western reason was some virginally pure, immaculately rational creation. On the contrary, it was the result of methodically killing off what Parmenides had brought into the world of the living as a divine gift from the realms of the dead. Right from the beginning, what we call reason came into existence with blood on its hands because it was just madness reacting to madness -- the ludicrous human attempt to cover over the legacy of a divine ecstasy which sees straight through our world of illusions to its deepest source." To judge from the glibly dismissive statements made by Plato, then Aristotle, then any number of later scholars, the whole affair could seem nothing more than a joke. But this unswerving glibness is the single factor that makes the murder so appalling, so completely crazy: is what was already preparing an entire culture for the insanity of reason. Here -- not in some pretty picture postcard portrait of divine madness or prophetic frenzy -- is the reality of what was done to the West to pollute the purity of sacred madness.°° And there is nothing coincidental about how, on his own tortured journey down into the world of the dead, Carl Jung came to see and record things which by now should be haunting in their familiarity. From the very first moment he embarks on the account of his descent towards madness, which was to stay secret so long together with his Red book, he starts introducing the two spirits MYSTICAL FOOL 59 or beings who are crucial for understanding his entire work -- and life. What he calls the spirit of this time is full of pride in its brash arrogance and reasonableness; blind and blinding; attached to cleverness and knowledge and science, or at least what it thinks of as science. But the other spirit he meets there, down in "the dark under- world of the spirit of the depths", is the mystery that in a moment snatches that all away. And few things could be more shocking as well as significant than the way that, almost at once, this spirit of the depths confronts Jung with the question: "Have you counted the murderers among the scholars?" Before he even has a chance to respond, though, the spirit of his time jumps straight in and sums up for Jung the totality of everything he will ever be able to write or say: "Whatever you say is madness."*" So, as soon as he comes near the halls and corridors of the underworld, the first things he is made to face are the murder committed by scholars and the inescapableness of madness -- which is hardly surprising, considering how the crazy reality of that same underworld was just what scholars in their own madness had started murdering twenty-five hundred years ago. Jung, however much or little he knew with his conscious understanding, was instinctively coming back home to where it all began. And one other thing he is taught there, in a hundred dif- ferent ways, is the utter madness hiding at every turn behind reasonableness and reason. He is even shown how reason is a poison that has slowly infected and destroyed us all.* Lessons learned in the underworld, things seen and heard, don't go away. They leave their mark for the rest of one's life. They stay, unforgettable -- and in the case of Jung, he was left with an indelible impression of what we usually call reason which is anything but usual. 60 PART ONE For most people, anyone would have to be a little crazy to cast the slightest doubt on the value and usefulness of reasoning. It's a natural human faculty to take full advantage of and perhaps, in the case of an artist or mystic, put aside for a while when not actually needed. But the fact is that, to him, it wasn't just an aspect of human nature available for us to use at any time we choose. Neither did he feel any pressing need to create some supposedly balanced picture by going out of his way to emphasize that reasoning has its good side alongside a bad one, is available to be used well as well as misused. In his eyes it was something much more dangerous, potent and real -- even when it might appear to be hopelessly ineffective. For him it was poison and murder, the thinnest of veneers on top of madness. It's a constant outrage against everything natural outside or inside us; an act of violence, almost apocalyptic in its intensity, aimed at the very essence of nature. To be quite clear: it's not just that rationality in its laziness, or rigidity, sometimes accidentally allows these atrocities and abuses to happen. The cleverness of rationality is the atrocities and the abuses itself. And all I can say is that his intuition was uncannily accurate. Even though he wasn't familiar with the historical intricacies of how reason and reasoning came into being, he happened to be perfectly correct. He was right about the murder. And he was quite right about reason being the dully unconscious part of us that, thanks to its unnaturalness, forces the sacred to suffer -- but also forces those few humans who know what they are doing to suffer, very consciously, so they can compensate for the reasonableness by restoring some balance between the human and the divine." To read Jung as he wanted and needs to be read seems, no less than in the case of reading ancient Greeks like Parmenides or MYSTICAL FOOL 61 Empedocles, almost impossible. It stretches our fixed expectations too far; distorts beyond every tolerable limit the ways we struggle to keep some illusion of peace with the world around us. Commentators are only too eager to leap on any comment he makes about reason that appears positive, or at least soothingly neutral. They don't hesitate to take isolated statements out of context without looking to left or right -- creating the image of a Jung itching to condemn anyone with the nerve to speak negatively about reason for doing the damnable work of the devil, ready to denounce anybody crazy enough to deny that reason and science are humanity's crowning powers as nothing but deluded prophets.°* What they forget to mention is the way he goes straight on, without the slightest trace of apology or shame, to do the devil's work himself while playing to perfection the role of deluded prophet. And what they somehow fail even to register is the heavy note of sarcasm that he constantly inserts into his remarks about reasoning: the ways he diabolically twists and turns the word, openly defies and mocks our reasonable assumptions, goes politely through the motions of praising it as humanity's highest power only to undermine it without a moment's mercy and unceremoniously tear it from its throne." In any normal world this gulf or abyss between what we expect and what Jung delivers, these assaults of his on what he can sometimes seem to treat as a virtual personification of reason, would raise an enormous question about what lies behind his persistent approach to our precious faculty of reasoning. Here, though, I will just say what needs to be said -- which is that this is the inevitable result of going to hell. The underworld, as Jung understood very well, is the world of paradox: the paradox of darkness inside the light, of the sanity in madness.°° 62 PART ONE And of course paradoxes like these are anathema to reason because its chief purpose is to cover them over while making sure, at the same time, to hide its own true face. But there is nothing more paradoxical than the fact that to get to see what it really looks like behind all its make-up -- behind its apparent familiarity, the banality of its ordinariness, its everyday innocence and blandness -- means having to make the journey into another world. Our modern fascination with thinking and reading about mythology can make it easy to imagine that finding one's way down to hell is something extremely noble, even very reasonable. And I have encountered plenty of Jungians convinced that all it takes to be initiated personally into the mysteries of the under- world is a few well-regulated sessions of what's known in the trade as active imagination. None of this, though, comes anywhere close to the reality. We each have our own hell -- but, paradoxically, the underworld is the underworld because there is nothing personal inside it that hasn't been stripped out. The underworld for Jung is the same as the underworld for Parmenides or the underworld now. It's just waiting for anyone crazy enough to be taken there. And there you are made to face the truth in its nakedness that can be almost too terrible to bear. This is why on the most basic, instinctive level scholars have had such a hard time accepting that someone like Parmenides -- founder of western logic -- or Pythagoras would have been forced to visit the world of the dead while still alive. This also is why they try so desperately to intellectualize the terrifying, transformative power of Parmenides logic. And this is why until recently Jung's assistants, editors, publishers worked so hard to cut any mention of the underworld out of his writings: is why they tried to suppress the direct MYSTICAL FOOL 63 parallel he himself was so keen to insist on, between his own otherworldly journey and the traditional ancient Greek descents into the world of the dead. It's why no one would allow him to place right at the start of his famous biography -- in the original classical Greek, as he requested -- the three words which, for him, were the most perfect motto to sum up his life's story as a whole. Asmenos ek thanatoio are the words from Homer's Odyssey that expressed Jung's infinite relief at being allowed to return, alive and in one piece, from the underworld. They mean "Glad to have escaped from death".°' Now, of course, we have the published evidence of his Red book to offer some fuller flavour of where he went -- and what it did to him. We can read Jung's own words insisting that only he and nobody else really knew what happened during the three days Christ spent in the underworld, because he had experienced it. And we have his own account of how he came to realize that "travelling to hell means becoming hell oneself". The trouble is that even being able to study what he said doesn't mean anyone is going to understand it, because these are hardly the easiest kind of words for people who are happy reading or writing about somebody else's journey to hell.°® In summer 1662 an Italian painter, Salvator Rosa, finished a portrait called Pythagoras emerging from the underworld. Down near the bottom right-hand corner of the painting is Pythagoras stepping out of the blackness, bent over with a twisted grin on his face: the infinitely ambiguous grin of someone who has come back to be of service to humanity but has seen through and past the crap of human illusions. Filling the left half of the picture, in total contrast, are his enthusiastically devoted disciples -- radiant with gladness and 64 PART ONE light. Women as well as men, some are raising their hands in thanks to heaven. Others are reaching down to help him up without any idea of what they might be touching. And they don't have a clue what they will be doing in the next few years or generations to turn his whole teaching upside down."? Then there is the embarrassing part -- just a matter of names, anyone could say, except that sometimes names can matter. Carl Jung insisted endlessly he was a man of science: a true scientist, empirical scientist. Those around him have, if possible, been even more devoted to promoting his scientific status and standing. But of course whenever there is such intense insistence, so much enthusiasm, one always has to look a little more deeply at what lies behind. And there is a lot that lies behind. Documents keep emerging that show just how keen Jung was to conceal the realities of his work, his interests, himself behind the safe label of a scientist. He planned in advance what to hide and the best ways to hide it; busily manoeuvred behind the scenes to block anyone who tried questioning things he didn't want questioned or saying things he didn't want brought into the open; was far less concerned with any truth than with the often paper-thin impression of being a scientist that he chose to create." For every strong argument that he was a genuine and respectable scientist, there is just as strong an argument that he wasn't. But the strange thing is that -- in all the pitched battles which keep being fought between those denying Jung was a man of science and those insisting he absolutely was -- no one seems 66 PART ONE to pay any attention to the balanced statement of his position offered by Jung himself. In perfect and exquisite alignment with the idea of two different spirits already introduced by him right at the start of his Red book, Jung liked to talk about himself as having two different personalities ever since he was a little child. What he called no. 1 personality, like his "spirit of this time', is not just filled with egoistic arrogance and pride. It also loves parading as a master of dead systems, of sophis- ticated emptiness and glibness: hides its chronic uncertainty about itself as well as everything else behind the smiling face each of us presents to the world with all our vanity and illusions, pretence and confidence, our thirst for impressive learning and expertise, the craving for reputation or success. And personality no. 2 is what has access to the spirit of the depths, to the realities of soul and meaning, to nature and to the life hidden away behind madness as well as death -- is our "true self" living our "true life", is the dark root of our being. Or as Jung expressed this difference on a different register: his no. 1 personality, with its unquestioning allegiance to the spirit of this time, is exactly what attracted him to science and reason. But the spirit of the depths, through his personality no. 2, is precisely what shattered that attachment; is what left him deeply humbled, an intensely lonely human being." For Jung himself these two contrasting personalities, along with the two spirits they correspond to, are fundamental facts of living in the world. There is no merging of them, harmonizing of them, even any integrating of them. They balance each other as forces of nature, complement each other, struggle with each other in a conflict that never comes to an end.® And if to our modern ears such a harshly irreducible dualism sounds disconcerting or downright bizarre, that's just another MYSTICAL FOOL 67 sign of how far we have drifted away from the roots of our own civilization -- because this same basic idea of one spirit attracting and attaching us to our human world of appearances in constant conflict with a spirit of darkness and madness and the under- world that threatens to snatch us away from everything human goes back thousands of years. To be more precise: it was absolutely central to the teaching of ancient prophet -- -healers such as Empedocles, or Parmenides. In fact it was, quite literally, the idea around which their entire teaching revolved. And when Jung turned to acknowledge those who had been the main inspiration for his own uncompromis- ingly dualistic view of the human psyche, it's no accident that he chose to mention Empedocles by name." The respectfulness expressed by Jung's surface personality towards the arts of science is perfectly plain to see. It decorates and embellishes his work. Almost everywhere it's on the most brilliant and ostentatious display, just like the gaudiness of a loud brass band doing the best it possibly can to drown out the mysteries of silence." But that still leaves open the question of what his other per- sonality wanted to say -- even though the answer is equally plain. For a long time it was known that Jung's Red book contained his deepest realizations as well as his most hostile statements about science. In fact that was one of the main factors always weighing against making it public.® And now that the book has been published, this is exactly what we find. Right at the start he spells out how his whole experience of descending into the underworld, along with his entire process of self-discovery, began from the moment when the spirit of the depths "took away my belief in science": how it took all his knowledge, all his rational understanding, and dedicated them instead to "the service of the inexplicable and paradoxical". 68 PART ONE This is nothing, though, compared to what is still to come; is only a prelude to the point where Jung sets about describing with the most exhaustive attention to detail how, even more so than reason, western science in spite of its many great benefits and undeniable advantages is literally a poison. To be more specific, it's a poison that only magic incantations can ever hope to counteract. And here, too, he is very careful to spell out how these magical incantations will need to be sung if they are going to have any effect at all. They will have to be sung "in the ancient manner' -- an un- mistakable reference by Jung to those ancient mystical practices which, in their own time, were so intimately familiar to both Parmenides and Empedocles." It can be interesting to watch the reactions of those who at first were fullest of enthusiasm for the Red book -- how unnerving they find these unscientific ideas, how embarrassing. They have the best possible reasons for doing so. After all, Jung himself felt intensely self-conscious and embarrassed about them for as long as he lived.° And it's only too easy for Jungians as well as Jung scholars to want to smoothe everything over by assuming that as he got older, became a little wiser, he snapped out of them and had realized the error of his ways. He didn't. All he did was become a bit more guarded about what he knew -- although you don't have to look very far to see what that was. To be sure, it was an important part of Jung's mission to have his discoveries of the unconscious taken seriously and accepted by the scientific community. But at the same time he saw where science happened to be heading: straight into the abyss of destroying itself along with the rest of humanity. From the time he wrote the Red book and for the rest of his life, one word that easily came to his lips whenever he found himself talking about the effects of western science or technology was the word "catastrophe". Another was "apocalypse". And when 70 PART ONE he decided to talk about what he was most afraid of, just a few years before he died, he stated without any hesitation: "modern science". But there are also two other words that never seemed too far from his tongue when the issue of modern science and its consequences came up. Those words are "diabolical", "devilish"."° And this is where we have to choose if we are just going to take from Jung whatever scraps attract our fancy while disposing of everything else -- or if we are actually prepared to listen to what he says, pay attention to his language, follow where he goes. Constantly he trumpets in every possible direction the an- nouncement that, far from being a mystic, he is only a scientist. Family, entourage, associates join in as loudly as they can. Even the slightest taint of mysticism: that's something to be avoided like a plague." But then there is the reality of what was quietly going on inside him behind the brass band, without all the racket and noise. For everyone -- from his own family through professional colleagues to occasional visitors -- it was an open secret that this is where the real Jung was to be found, but that he kept his mysticism well hidden for the sake of keeping his scientific reputation in- tact. And if one were to ask why he didn't just go public and explain himself, instead, the answer is that he did. In fact he explained himself only too clearly, although it seems there are very few who have wanted to hear. For example he once gave the whole game away when he complained how "people nowadays have such hopelessly mud- dled ideas about anything 'mystical', or else such a rationalistic fear of it, that if a mystical experience should ever come their way they are sure to misunderstand its true character and will MYSTICAL FOOL 71 do anything to protect themselves against, or just repress, its numinous reality." In other words: even to mention the word "mystical" in public is utterly futile because, as a direct result of people's "lack of insight and defective understanding", anything you say is guaranteed to be taken the wrong way. So for him the solution was quite simple. Either don't talk about mystical matters at all, or talk about them in such a veiled way that only those with ears to under- stand will understand. And then, as if this wasn't enough, there is the letter he wrote that comes as close as anything not just to giving the game away but to laying out the most basic rules of the game. This is the same letter -- excluded as if almost deliberately from the volumes of his published correspondence -- where, humbly, intensely alone, he describes how in his life he had chosen the path of conscious suffering because he realized this is the only way to compensate for all the suffering inflicted on the divine by humanity's love affair with rationality. Immediately after stating that he saw it as his central role to help "God to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason more than God's secret intentions", he goes straight on in the very next sentence to state the truth quite bluntly: "There is a mystical fool in me that proved to be stronger than all my science." Here we have everything Jung always seemed so determined to take his public stand and protest against. And what we can see is that, according to his own criteria, he is no longer just a man with all his delusions playing the role of prophet. He is also a mystic together with all his foolishness. He is no mystic and he is a mystic. He is exactly what he denies. And precisely what Jung would like to accuse others of 72 PART ONE he is guilty of, himself, just like the proverbial snake devouring its own tail. You could say it's only a question of one single letter. And of course, in the most literal and obvious sense, that's true enough. But nothing is more important than to understand how these things really work. Nowhere does he claim that the mystical fool in him is as powerful as the whole of his science -- is equally strong. Instead he states, quite correctly, that it proved to be stronger. And there is a very simple reason why. The spirit of the depths will always be at odds with the spirit of our time, just as personality no. 2 will always be in conflict with the superficial wants and needs of personality no. 1. But at the end of the day, as he makes so clear in his Red book, the personality and spirit of the depths prove to be stronger." They are more powerful; more valid. You could call it a law of gravity: the logic of the underworld. They are what truly matters. In spite of all the idiotic sound and short-lived fury, they are what has the last word. In confronting the science of his time Jung was faced with quite a dilemma. And ultimately there's only one honest or truthful solution to this dilemma -- which is to face the fact that modern science in its existing forms, with its existing concerns and preoccupations, is no real science at all. It's just a few broken, badly twisted fragments of what science should and could have been. In the most fundamental sense it's nothing but a "bastard of a science", as Jung once described the arrogant attitude that thinks it can block off access to the world of the unconscious: that believes it has the right to isolate and insulate humans from the living realms of the dead." Jung's own struggles to engage with science, to question science, redefine science, warn against science have kept people busy trying out every conceivable combination of engaging with his work or questioning it; redefining it; warning against it. But what's so easily forgotten in this battle of interpretations, person- alities, words, is that on the deepest level there was never any need for Jung to set about redefining anything. In spite of modernity's ruthless demands and its endless pressures, all he was doing was returning as a matter of instinct to what western science had been from the very start. 74 PART ONE He was only finding his way back to what science, in the naturalness of its fragility, had originally been intended to be -- a science already perfectly integrated with prophecy and healing, a science based on the arduous process of consciously descending into the unconscious, of going down into the world of the dead to bring back for the sake of others the gifts of wisdom and life. This instinctive process of rediscovery has nothing to do with any familiar clichés about evolution or regression, least of all with any complicated intellectual schemes about regression and evolution at the same time. On the contrary: it's just the simplest possible matter of genetics, of ancestry, of a reality forgotten by us on the surface of ourselves but remembered very well in our hidden depths. We have to keep bearing in mind that for Jung -- unlike Freud -- the word "primordial" doesn't point to something we need to make a problem of or try to leave behind. "Rather, it is the solution to the problem of modernity." And the solution to the problems of modern science lies in what science once used to be." That raises the question of how, or where, the primordial is to be found. It's perfectly true that Jung had the finest of libraries, full of books he studied and loved. But those books aren't what made him what he was or even gave him the knowledge that he had. Assessing his wisdom by his books, inventing the fictional personality of a "textual Jung", is the height of academic absur- dity -- because he, better than anyone, knew there is no way of finding primordial reality in some library. It has to be discovered inside oneself; can only be uncovered on the harrowing journey down into the world of the dead. As for the process of reading, all the fuss about references and different texts: the best they can ever do is lend a helping and reassuring hand, offer a few timely echoes, give a bit of extra MYSTICAL FOOL 75 substance and form to what one already mysteriously knows, add some firmer outlines to the affiliations and lineages vaguely intuited inside." And as for where Jung's affiliations lie, I really don't have to say too much because just a few pointers should do. For example, the ancient word that perhaps came closest in meaning to our "scientist" was physikos -- a term often used to describe people like Parmenides or Empedocles. But not only is it the origin of our word "physicist". It was the source of our word "physician", as well; and Parmenides, together with Empedocles, happened to be healers too. This is nowhere near the end of the story, though. Apart from being the common word for a physicist or scientist, a phy- sician or healer, physikos was also the title given to alchemists alongside those prototypical scientists we like to call magicians. And that brings us straight back to Jung's endless insistence on portraying himself as a pure empiricist who focused all his attention on the facts of experience -- because the one specialist who used to concentrate more than anybody else on gathering and working with hard empirical facts was, as we can see so well with Empedocles, the ancient magician." But this working correspondence between Carl Jung and the earliest Greek philosophers isn't simply a matter of generalities. It also functions, as of course it should, even down to the kind of details so tempting to slip over or ignore. Jung found himself using techniques for communicating, talking, writing, which would be extraordinary enough if used by anyone nowadays -- not to mention a scientist. What those techniques lead towards is something almost completely submerged, something very different from the heady world of literary borrowings and theoretical ideas that tends to keep historians so frantically distracted. 76 PART ONE Hardly visible any more, thanks to the efficiency with which it was stripped out of what he wrote or said, is his fondness for expressing himself through repetition: through circling with his words around the same subjects, time and time again." But that's exactly how Parmenides as well as Empedocles also used to express themselves -- repeating and circling around themselves, from beginning to end, because it was the way they had been shown and inwardly trained how to speak. After all, this was a time-honoured incantatory technique among magical healers: among the type of prophet-healer, or iatromantis, that they both really were in spite of the endless later attempts to dress them up as something else. These prophet -- healers knew instinctively how to use their own words not only to keep focused, but for the sake of healing; were able to use repetition for opening the doors to the unconscious and easing the passage into the underworld." Just as surprising, by any modern standards, is Jung's very conscious policy of deliberately using ambiguity in his writings. "The language I speak must be ambiguous, must have two meanings." He is careful to explain why for him this is so important. Intentional ambiguity is far superior to any other available form of communication. Ambiguity alone corresponds to the nature of reality, as well as the reality of nature; can do them both justice.®° There are some situations, though, where no amount of explaining is going to make any difference -- will ever be enough. For its own part, the bustling Jung industry has naturally or rather unnaturally done everything possible to sidestep any real consideration of the subject. In fact even the people who used to pride themselves on their personal closeness to Jung have shown how ill-equipped they are for understanding why he valued ambiguity so highly." MYSTICAL FOOL 77 But Parmenides and Empedocles, as well as other Greeks, were also very deliberate in their use of riddles and ambiguity. They, too, understood that only by being intentionally ambiguous can one evoke the fullness of reality and do it true justice. And it was their welcoming of ambiguity that, more than anything else, brought Aristotle's mockery and fury down on their heads. As he irritably complained about Empedocles, who in his life was the perfect example of a prophet -- healer: "Avoid ambiguity! This is what people like to use when they have nothing to say but want to pretend they have something to say, like Empedocles for instance, who tricks and deceives with all his circlings and circumlocutions. And his listeners end up experiencing exactly what people in general tend to experi- ence when listening to the words of prophets because, so long as prophets are speaking their riddling ambiguities, everyone just mindlessly nods along."® Ambiguity has been well and truly excluded, drowned out by the voice of rationality -- by what Jung liked to describe as the "petty reasoning mind, which cannot endure any paradoxes'. Or at least this is what rationalists choose to think. But what they forget is that originally ambiguity and paradox were an integral, essential feature of real logic: of the sacred logic which always stands untouched although savaged by their reasoning.* Ambiguity is the voice of prophecy, and at the same time is like the wildness of nature. It plunges us into the streams of paradox, is a constant confrontation with our conscious need for control. And, strangely enough, ambiguity itselfis not ambiguous at all. On the contrary, it's perfectly clear; an endless invitation into the open landscape of reality. Paradoxically it's only the process of reasoning that, with each step it takes in trying to stamp out ambiguities, ends up creating new ambiguities instead -- even 78 PART ONE while pretending to be on top of the very same situation it's simply making worse and worse. The voices of Parmenides or Empedocles or Jung are so confusing to our conscious mind because they are calling us into places most people have lost the courage as well as the knowledge to go. Their ambiguities are total non-ambiguity: the confrontation of humans, then as now, with the truth of themselves. But, at the same time, these ties linking Jung to the ancient world reach even further and far deeper than that. Memories, dreams, reflections is the name of the famous book, published just after he had died, that he ended up ambiguously referring to as his "so-called autobiography". And certainly it contains his own voice -- along with the voices of his secretary, his editors, his publishers. Many expert hands came together to smooth over and set straight what he had said; domesticate it; "auntify" it by making it into something even the stufhest of old maids would be happy to hear; and discreetly, when necessary, help it disappear. Some of the things he wanted to say managed to get through. A lot of what he tried to communicate never did. And even though a more or less accurate record survives of the original memoirs that Jung himself dictated over a period of two years, it never was too easy for much information about them to trickle out.* One of those things that has never seen the light of day was his reply when -- during the first week of October 1957 -- he found himself being asked to speak out honestly about the real nature of his work. This is hardly a surprise. His reply is bound to sound so insignificant to any ordinary reader, so trivial, so devoid of any serious or meaningful content, that it would be a miracle if the passage had been allowed to stand in his published biography. As he starts speaking, you can still hear him laugh. He declares that his entire work, all his presumed wisdom and grand MYSTICAL FOOL 79 achievement, boils down to this: that he fell into a gigantic hole from which he somehow, if he was going to survive, had to dig himself out. Then -- after quoting those words of Homer that always came to him whenever he pondered his luck in returning alive from the underworld, "Glad to have escaped from death", and making sure to recommend them as the best possible motto for the story of his life -- he goes straight on to make the simplest of statements. His whole science, he explains, derived entirely from his visions and dreams." In just a couple of sentences, with the help of that free associ- ation he fell into when dictating his memoirs, he has spelled out a message which from any normal point of view is not just striking. It's incomprehensible, paradoxical, bizarre. And this is precisely why no one has paid it any attention. Jung is saying that everything one could refer to as his science really came to him from the underworld; from visions; from dreams. And this is exactly what Parmenides, master of incubation or entering other states of consciousness, lord of dreams, had demonstrated when he brought logic along with the freshest discoveries in western science straight back from his journey into the underworld. Jung is simply reliving the way things used to be. But just as Parmenides' teaching would soon be covered over, and its integrity broken by Plato along with so many other well-intentioned thinkers, the spirit of this time got to work very quickly and efficiently to cover over what Jung had wanted to say. In fact it's essential to remember that the entity he chose to refer to as the spirit of our time isn't only obsessed and fascinated with all the trivial superficialities of life. Just thinking about it that way could hardly be more wrong. 80 PART ONE On the contrary, there is nothing this spirit enjoys more than entertaining itself with what it doesn't understand -- than fiddling and tinkering and interfering with the wisdom of the depths, subtly and imperceptibly rationalizing it, ever so cleverly making a mess of it by presenting it with a grand flourish as something of its own." And if you wanted, you could call our present understanding of Jung a masterpiece manufactured by the constantly bustling spirit of this time. Just two days earlier, on the 1* of October 1957, Jung was at Bollingen: the stone tower and retreat he himself had designed, then helped to build, near the far upper edge of Lake Zurich. Here too, as soon as he started talking, it was about his origi- nal dreams and visions -- the visions and dreams from which all his later work would flow -- that he wanted to speak. His words, that day, were duly noted down as usual by his secretary. And eventually they would turn up, mauled, as one of the most thrilling climaxes in the published version of his biography. Right at the end of the most central and crucial chapter called "Confrontation with the unconscious", Jung appears in grand style as hero of the depths: the hero whose whole life was transformed when he managed, more or less successfully, to work on the chaos of unconsciousness and against overwhelming odds hammer it into a shape and form he could present to his contemporary world. Of course such a heroic role is something Jung himself delighted in playing when his no. 1 personality took the stage. And the myth of him striving valiantly with his "ordering mind" to inject some conscious arrangement into this unconscious chaos -- just like the familiar notion of the unconscious as an incredibly destructive power that has to be worked with 82 PART ONE but mastered, organized, directed -- is central to almost any appreciation of his work.°®' There is only one problem. On that day at Bollingen, what he was saying could hardly have been more different. He begins -- not ends -- with a comment about his more or less successful effort to impose some order on the seething material erupting out of the unconscious; compares his initial visions and dreams to the flow of fiery lava which, after a while, turns into solid stone so it can be worked on. But only now does he explain where all his thoughts and comments have been leading: "It was the passion and intensity inside this fire, it was the stream of lava itself which is the force that compelled whatever happened to happen. And so, completely naturally, everything fell into its own proper place and order." And this is where we need to pause before going on. Jung's words move. On this particular day they were carry- ing him towards open acknowledgement of how the unconscious takes care of everything. We can have any number of anxieties about disorder; any amount of busy fantasies about imposing some order on it. And the reality all the time is that the unconscious forces we are so frightened of are themselves, paradoxically, mysteriously, the true creators of order. But for Jung's secretary, Aniela Jaffé, this was all moving in the wrong direction. She was writing a biography, almost an autobiography -- and in her commendable devotion wanted to keep everyone focused on the virtues of the great man himself, not on the virtues of some unnameable unconscious. So, with plenty of well-intentioned thoughtfulness, she scrupulously reversed the flow of his thinking; systematically inverted the sequence of his own sentences; ever so delicately turned everything on its head.*® MYSTICAL FOOL 83 If it was just a question here of Jung's own secretary dutifully tampering with the things he said, that would be significant enough. But it's only the start. Almost as if he guessed that not everyone would understand what he had tried to say about the stream of lava taking care of everything, Jung goes straight on to repeat himself in even simpler and blunter terms. And now we no longer have to rely on Jaffé to educate, or entertain, us. The one scholar who for years was able to study these unpub- lished interviews independently, and in far greater detail than anybody else, decided to make a translation of this very same passage available. And here, word for word, is his version of what Jung at the tower in Bollingen went on to say next: "I wanted to achieve something in my science and then I was plunged in this stream of lava, and then had to classify everything." The trouble is that, here too, Jung said nothing of the kind. What he really did say was very different: "I wanted to achieve something in my science, and then I bumped into this stream of lava, and then it brought everything into order."® Here is perhaps the closest one could come to a confession from Jung as an old man about what, in his life, was really what. The science he had tried to lay claim to, in spite of all his dashing dilettantism and amateur theatrics -- on its own it came to nothing. All it did was bring him face to face with something infinitely vaster and more powerful than himself. And, from then on, that power arranged and guided every- thing. Of course you could say none of these distortions, these gross mistranslations, actually matter; and on a certain level you would be right. We are well past the stage where a couple more murders here or there are going to make much of a difference -- and I am perfectly aware that, from any rational point of view, not one 84 PART ONE single detail in what I have mentioned is worth thinking or even reading about. Besides, nothing would be easier than to say: We knew that anyway! It's common knowledge that, regardless of all his warn- ings and cautions about the dangers involved, Jung's whole work is based on his profoundest respect for the wisdom contained in our unconscious. The fact is, though, that it never was or ever will be a ques- tion of what anybody knows intellectually. We can understand everything just wonderfully on the level of theory; of principle. But that's not the point. The point is to watch how even the people closest to Jung alongside the brightest, most scientific of Jungian experts change him; rewrite him; silence him. And we, too, might have the most brilliant knowledge lodged away in some drawer of our theoretical brain. But the only thing that counts is what each of us does in every moment with each thought of ours, every breath. All that matters is whether we can consciously stay with the mystery of the unconscious, helping it in its wisdom to arrange and order things, or whether we use our own accumulated wisdom to interfere. Naturally one could call these misinterpretations and mis- translations sheer human error. Anybody determined to be uncharitable could even call them downright negligence, or worse. And in a sense they are both; but in another sense they are neither. It's not just that they emerge independently, spontaneously, from some intelligent individual here or there. They are simply collective manifestations of the spirit of our time. The trouble is that, in our superficially individualistic culture, we have no context for understanding this kind of mistranslation; no language; no frame of reference. For us, these misinterpretations are just accidents -- if we ever notice them at MYSTICAL FOOL 85 all. It doesn't occur to us that there could be such a thing as a psychology of mistranslation, a pathology of rationalization. And this is because those murders committed, so many centuries ago, by Plato and Aristotle have become the stream we all swim in. Our entire lives are a rationalization: one big mistranslation. But that only ever becomes visible -- if we can muster the courage to look -- in the case where someone like Jung steps out of the stream. Then, it's immediately the same old story as with Parmenides or Empedocles all over again. When Parmenides was taken down to the underworld only to be given everything he knew by the queen of the dead, she sent him back into the world of the living as a messenger: as a prophet whose job was essentially to do everything in her name. Of course, in this world of illusions and deceptions, he had to appear to be a human like any other human -- and, if possible, play the game of humanity better than anybody else. But for Parmenides himself, the underlying reality was that everything was being ordered; arranged; forcibly directed and guided by the divine power of the underworld inside him. And, quite naturally, that's not the end of the parallels. Just as Jung's words were misinterpreted, mistranslated, altered, in exactly the same way Parmenides' words were manipulated and changed to make him say what others wanted him to say: what they needed him to say."° Back then, as now, one had to do whatever it took to make Parmenides take the credit for his wisdom -- not the sacred. It was simply a question of how best to tamper with his words to arrive at the desired result; and then that result becomes enshrined as history, the history in which we silently agree to bury reality. A few days later, Jung gave another interview which his secretary quickly transcribed. Vividly he describes what it was like as he started sinking into the underworld -- having to learn how to find his way around in the world of the dead while still alive. 'This is where he mentions his unbearable aloneness because there was absolutely no one who could help or understand; tells about literally having to cling on to the table in front of him to prevent himself from falling apart; explains how he was terrified by the almost constant experience of feeling again and again he was being torn to pieces, ripped into shreds by the archetypal forces and powers inside him."! And so we are brought back almost full circle to where we started, although now it should perhaps be a little easier to appreciate the true significance of what he goes on to say next. He talks about how horrific the whole situation was. It was one endless storm; and through everything he had to pretend to be a normal father, play the role of husband, function as a doctor. That he was able to keep it all up was a matter of brute force. Anyone else, he points out, would have been destroyed. "But there was a daimonic power in me."" Amazingly, all it needs is Jung's mention of being a normal father and husband and doctor -- and suddenly we know without the slightest doubt just what he is talking about. It's the same MYSTICAL FOOL 87 with the famous passage in Memories, dreams, reflections where he describes having to keep repeating the address where he lives, or reminding himself he has a wife and children, just to convince himself that he actually exists. Jung is so normal, so like us! He is so grounded and balanced, so eminently human and sane: nothing could be clearer."* And here, too, the significance of Jung's continuing ability to play the role of father and husband and doctor seems so obvious. Here is a man with an unbreakable ego who, through sheer conscious force or willpower, was always in command and knew how to keep everything under control. 'The fact that he managed to turn up for meals on time, even do his military service, is irrefutable testimony to the strength of the human ego and living proof of the fact that never for a single moment was his sanity in doubt. This was a man consciously, triumphantly, taking his stand against the unconscious and winning out against it: an example to us all." But then there is the small matter of whether we care to pay attention to what Jung himself actually said. Words, for him, mattered. He was only too conscious that the phrases and expressions he used had particular meanings, implications, innuendos which few people would ever care about or even notice; that it was a constant struggle, and losing battle, to try to preserve the "full value" of his words." And that final mention of a daimonic power or force, a "damonische Kraft", happens to be far more than some throw- away statement. On the contrary: the word "daimonic" meant something very specific, and perfectly consistent, for Jung. 'That's hardly surpris- ing, because it also meant something very specific and consistent for Fgeud -- and for Aristotle, and Empedocles and Parmenides and Homer. 88 PART ONE Daimonic means what's divine in us, or as good as divine. It's what lies beyond or below or outside our human capacities, not to mention our human understanding. It has nothing to do with our own little conscious ego and the control we imagine we have, except for the fact that it's guaranteed to disrupt the flimsy stability of our egos and smash all our illusions of control. It comes from somewhere else, is irresistible; mostly only shows itself in certain people who can be described as blessed, or cursed, depending on one's point of view. In Jung's own partic- ular case, he saw it as an inheritance transmitted to him very specifically from his mother: an uncanny gift that has its source in the unconscious, belongs to the unconscious, points to the unconscious."° And now- -- in the midst of the ordeal that during his interviews Jung kept using words like "terrifying" and "horrific" to describe, although his secretary very discreetly either erased or replaced the majority of them with nicer-sounding words -- we can start to see the horrifying paradox unfolding in front of us. Jung is not talking about his personal, conscious, human powers at all. Just the same as with the stream of lava: it's the power which is non-human and beyond human consciousness, or mastery or control, that takes care of everything. Now for him, held between opposing worlds, nothing was simple any more. Even to be human, or act human, involved a power that isn't human. Even the easiest and most trivial of things we all take for granted, like performing as a doctor or husband or father, literally required a superhuman force. Even the process of appearing to be normal was an act of magic. As for his ego, its only real role was to mediate and witness and watch -- watch the unconscious struggling to master the un- conscious, power engaged with power, daimon against daimon. MYSTICAL FOOL 89 And if you think I am making this up, that's simply because you are a stranger to the world of the ancient Greeks or the world Jung himself used to live in. In such a world it goes without saying that only what's beyond human inside a human can stand up to the divine. It needs one divine force to come to grips with, or combat, or get the better of another. In the words of the famous old alchemical saying with which Jung was very familiar: Nature masters Nature, Hé physis tén physin kratei."' In other words, it needs a non-human strength to become truly human. Even being the most ordinary human is, in reality, a superhuman task. And this superhuman task is what, for Jung, the process of seemingly human individuation happens to be. To engage in it one has to be swept up into a battle of the gods, which is why the Jungian process of individuation will never be for wimps. It's not for those who are so terrified of being overwhelmed by the divine archetypes or of falling a helpless victim to their power that they think they can shrink away from them -- as even the best trained Jungian analysts might try to do when they imagine it's safer to identify with being a poor, feeble, limited human being. That, after all, is just to become hopelessly trapped in iden- tifying with the dark side of the archetype of humanity. In what can be numbered among the most important outlines of his whole psychology that he ever wrote, Jung described how "the strongest and best" are those who invoke danger deliberately; throw caution to the winds; "purposely expose themselves to the danger of being devoured by the monster of the maternal abyss'. This is why true individuation is the rarest and most difficult thing. It's a path so hard it can be almost impossible to follow through to the end. Or, as he would confess when hardly anyone was listening, it's only for the very few. After a certain stage most other people 0 PART ONE would be much better off just going back to church and living their collective lives like everyone else." The way is tough; immensely dangerous. Nothing at all is guaranteed because this is the way of the magician. As for those apparently simple words about "a daimonic power inside me', so easy to slip over even for those who should have known better but didn't, Jung had already said everything that needs to be said -- because possession of a daimonic power is, as he explains elsewhere, precisely the sign of a magician." And this is what, inescapably and regardless of anything we think or believe, it all comes down to. An acquaintance of Jung's, Miguel Serrano, has left a few notes about their meetings and correspondence. To him it was self-evident that, as he would write to Jung a year before Jung's death, there are not many people who understand you -- "not even your own disciples". But he was also much more specific about what he realized made the man tick, kept him going; observed that "even though he fought against it, Jung condemned himself to be a magician who was willing to pass beyond the frontiers of official science in our time". And as for this Jung he had encountered -- "Jung, the magician' -- only a poet or priest or magician would ever be "capable of propounding his message, interpreting the underlying language of his work, which is already there like a palimpsest".!° Perhaps you won't know what a palimpsest is. Not many people do. It's an old Greek term: a word that describes the nature and fate of our western culture perfectly. A palimpsest is a piece of writing material, like an ancient papyrus, on which what was written originally has been rubbed out and erased so that something else -- often an entirely different kind of text -- can now be written on top. MYSTICAL FOOL 91 Sometimes the original text has been erased so completely that it's impossible to make out what it was, what it had said; or perhaps one never suspects there was anything else written underneath. But mostly it's possible to make out the traces of a few words or isolated letters here and there -- and even get a sense of what the obliterated text had been, of the deleted story it once wanted to tell. BACK TO THE SOURCE I must have been about fourteen at the time. The situation is still perfectly clear to my mind. A girlfriend in London invited me round to her family home. "My parents are out for the whole evening." And I remember thinking, "Well, maybe now I'm going to get lucky!" When I arrived, the first thing she did was to take me straight into the living room. Quietly she said "There is some- thing I'd like you to see", before switching on the television just as a documentary was starting about a man I had never heard of. There were some impressive views of a magic-looking castle that the peculiar man, called Jung, had built on the edge of a lake; and they awakened something in me, strangely moved me. But for years all that stayed in my memory was the ghostly image of a tower beside a lake. And that was that. First I had to go through all my teens followed by every twenty: there are so many experiences we need to have. Soon I was into my early thirties and confronted with what, back then, seemed the most impossibly difficult period in my life. One day a resolution took shape inside me that it was time to get away. I had only just learned to drive so I packed some things in a car, got up before dawn the next morning to go down to Dover and catch the first ferry for Calais. 98 PART TWO Then I did the same thing I used to do so often as a teenager when I was searching, seeking, but didn't have even the remotest notion of what I was looking for. I would stand hitch-hiking at the side of the road, any road, and take the next ride that came along: letting the road itself guide me. And now, in the car, I just drove without the slightest idea where I was going. I would stop to stretch my legs, have a bite to eat, keep an eye on the car's own needs for petrol and water and oil. Otherwise, though, I simply allowed the road to take me -- without a map, without even paying the least attention to any of the directional signs. It was getting dark when I found myself at the French -- Swiss border. But still I didn't have the tiniest interest in where this thoughtless experiment was taking me. Choicelessly | left the highway; watched myself driving along smaller roads, then streets; out into the cold December countryside. My only consolation was that | had a good sleeping bag and would be able to curl up comfortably on the back seat. I was pulled onto a country lane, caught sight of a railway track running close by. At one point something beyond any con- scious control unexpectedly told me to stop: I pulled over, with some difficulty, into the tall grass growing beside the road. And then it was as if 1 was being drawn physically out of the car, forced to cross the road, walk straight ahead into the pitch darkness without being able to see a thing in front of me. My only thought was that I hoped I'd be able to find my way back to the car. After blindly groping forward and sometimes stumbling I started noticing a sharpness in the air, felt I heard a strange murmur, sensed I could glimpse a hint of something shifting in front of me. Suddenly I stopped -- realizing I had come to the edge of water. Then it was as if I was being yanked to my left, guided near the water's edge. There seemed to be some obstacles but nothing BACK TO THE SOURCE 99 was clear except for a single white blur that appeared ahead of me. I came closer; saw, with difficulty, that it was some kind of stone; and experienced the abrupt, almost unceremonious need to sit down. My last thought was how lucky I happened to be at least to be wearing a warm coat. And then any sense of myself was gone. I was no longer who I had been a minute ago, a lifetime ago. Without any warning or even the subtlest kind of transition I had turned into someone totally different -- and yet no other than myself. Just as sharp and clear as if 1 was meeting my own image right in front of me, I was a knight. My hair, I noticed, had become a pitch but shining black. I was a warrior in the fullest sense: immensely powerful and destructive but in a proper, not a Vicious, way. I was being confronted with myself as a destroyer. Even more, I was being shown the perils and dangers in this; the immensely difficult process of learning how to trust myself with this; how to discover, and keep discovering, its timeless essence which will always be beyond every positivity as well as negativity. But, at the same time, even to want to name this is to let it disappear. And then, in a stunningly dramatic moment, the moon came out from behind the clouds -- close to full. Immediately everything was transformed. I glanced up and around and, to my amazement, I was right in front of the tower I had seen on television all those years ago: the tower built by that man called Jung. And the building itself was enough, straight away, to convince me of his greatness. On the one hand it was incredibly squat and strong, chthonic and rooted, a place that would never allow itself to be blown away; on the other, just like the place of a magical being or a structure from out of some fairy tale. 100 PART TWO He has literally made a fairy-tale dream come true -- on earth. But it wasn't only my surroundings that had been trans- formed. Just as suddenly, looking towards the tower, I too had changed into the oldest and wisest of men. It wasn't some change I was imagining or thinking up. It was there in my body, in the sensation of my face and hands. I could feel it in the flowing grey hair, drooping grey moustache, trailing grey beard, and in the physical wisdom which is as ancient as time. The wise old man is what he is because he has endured everything the earth can throw at him but, although he can seem so thoughtful to others, doesn't think or consider. This is the state he always abides in, which is the place of no abiding at all where spirit is united with earth. He just is the earth's suffering, made conscious; its beauty and pain; its humanity. And then -- I don't know how else to describe it -- Jung came towards me, but not as a man although it was unmistakeably him. He came like a wind moving in a spiral, stirring everything but at the same time perfectly still. It was as if he was silently speaking from everywhere, but also from inside myself. He carefully explained to me the real meaning of the word "home": where my true home is. At that time I had no way of knowing just how appropriate his advice would be, considering how I'd have to spend most of my adult existence moving from place to place without any fixed or ordinary home. He went into telling me, through the silence, what I had to do; offered me guidance for the rest of my life. But finally this strangest of meetings was over and I knew it was the moment to go. Before standing up I turned round in the moonlight to look at what, the whole while I had.been sitting there, I'd been leaning against. The surface of the stone was flat but full of carefully carved inscriptions which, because of the shadows and the angle of the moon, were hard to read. But with patience BACK TO THE SOURCE 101 I could make out symbols for each of the inner planets -- Sun, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, Mars, with Mercury on a little figure in the middle -- and was drawn straight to the word hosmos, which had been written in classical Greek. So was all the rest of the inscribed text: a quotation at the top that I immediately recognized as coming from the ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus and, at the bottom, a few famous words from Homer about being guided into the underworld "toward the gates of the sun and the land of dreams". When I had managed to get up, I kissed Venus. As I walked down to the water's edge, the moon was shining above the lake but also reflected just as brightly in it. There was the moon above, the moon below. And I was both. Making my way back to the car was easy. Inside I took out the little black notebook in my coat pocket and wrote down everything that had happened, starting with the date for title -- night of 23 December 1985. From that night on nothing for me would ever be quite the same. It was as if I had somewhere touched a consciousness of work to be done without having any conscious idea, yet, of what form that work would take. And I realize, needless to say, that in telling this I lay myself open to every kind of accusation. Even the fact that Jung created a retreat for himself, here at Bollingen, where he spent most of his time alone is troubling enough for a lot of people. It's troubling for a very good reason. This is the place he was guided to withdraw to so that, over the years, he could nurture in solitude the prophetic secrets which had first been shown to him while he was working on his Red book. And that happens to be a side of him which in spite of, or rather because of, the Red book's publication not everyone wants to be reminded of.! Of course I am also aware that for people nowadays who boast about how they have gone beyond Jung and left him far behind -- who laugh at him for his horrific lack of rationality BACK TO THE SOURCE 103 or truly evolutionary thought, who mock him for clinging to some quaint idea that life needs to have meaning instead of summoning the fortitude to embrace without any reservation our meaningless modern world -- the tower he built at Bollingen is nothing but his "private psycho -- Disneyland". What they somehow fail to understand is that for certain individuals a base in nature away from the relentless pressures of such a wonderfully modern world, away from what Empedocles already referred to as "the ten thousand worthless things that exist among humans and blunt their cares", is an essential reference point of reality and sanity inside our collective psycho -- Disneyland.' But at the same time I am aware as well of how quick those who considered themselves the select few, privileged to be intimately acquainted with Jung himself, could be to complain that far "too many people live with an image of their relationship to Jung which is utterly unreal". Needless to say, their point is unquestionably valid. The temptation can be irresistible to get caught up in some "fantasy relationship" with the man which has no grounding whatsoever in reality. And I will be the first to admit that everything I have said about my encounter with him at Bollingen is on any sensible assessment utterly, absurdly, unreal. At the same time, though, it actually happened. I was drawn there, to his tower, to sit in the dark against his alchemical stone, driven blind.? But I also found it very interesting to note as I wrote this book how -- while Jung talks openly in his published memoirs about only being able to incarnate the living archetype of the wise old man at Bollingen, and nowhere else -- the pages where he speaks out about the central importance for him of the archetype of the knight are locked up in what used to be a heavily guarded record of the interviews he gave just a few years before he died. 104 PART TWO Hardly anyone had been allowed even to see that record, let alone read it, back in 1985. And, right down to this day, it has never been published.' Naturally none of this does anything at all to change the fact that, from a rational point of view, everything I have described about my invitation to Bollingen -- arriving as if by accident at that one particular place out of all the countless millions of possible places in Europe -- is unbelievable. Not to put too fine a point on the matter: practically speaking it's impossible. But, again, it was only as I was writing this book that I came across a reference to the inscription Jung had carved in Latin just above his stone fireplace -- right there at Bollingen. Quaero quod impossibile: "I seek what is impossible." This is Jung himself in his own, carved words. He was never one more, pious believer in some ridiculously impossible dogma. On the contrary, he was a Gnostic who actively sought the impossible out.° And as for what Jung was referring to, with these mysterious words of his about seeking the impossible, we can still say exactly what that was. He was referring to the courage of those who are prepared, regardless of risk or cost, to make the journey into the underworld so they will be able to encounter the queen of the dead -- so they can come face to face with the goddess Persephone. That, after all, is what Bollingen was for Jung. It was his point of entry to the underworld.° On the other hand it would be easy enough to say, because it would be true, that what most of the people around him managed to do was simply to turn his great impossibility into their many little possibilities -- their professional successes, satisfying achievements and especially their reassuring understandings. BACK TO THE SOURCE 105 But as the one person who had sat with him during some of the most intensely difficult times in his life, and heard him say things he couldn't tell anybody else, once stated: "no one, not even those closest to him, ever knew him as a whole". In reality there was never an inner circle around him. There were only intensifying degrees of failure to understand the mys- tery and secret of what Jung was, or what his work was. As for those who would go on to explain how thoroughly and fully they understood him along with the most demanding of his writings, or congratulate each other on their complete and expert grasp of his ideas, it's only logical to consider them the biggest fools. After all, one has to be infinitely careful in claiming to know anything about a person who often confessed he could never understand himself -- and understood less and less of the mystery he was as he grew older.' This is what happens when, every moment, one lives so closely with a mystery that one becomes it. The question of what Jung's work was has been answered in a hundred different ways -- and, in the most fundamental sense, never been answered at all. At least it can seem safe to say that, underneath the endless shifting of trends and fashions and interpretations, there is one unquestionably stable point of certainty. This is the fact that he had an unflinching commitment to the individual: was selflessly dedicated to unlocking the secret inside each of us and helping everyone towards the goal of self-fulfilment. After all, first and foremost he was a healer; a medical expert bent on treating people's problems and curing them of their personal suffering; a therapist of the human psyche, a carer for the individual's soul.° And this line of thinking is just fine, so long as you avoid looking too closely at what he meant by the word "individual' -- because then you will suddenly find yourself staring straight into a bottomless hole. As for Jung the sensitive, intuitive healer: the stories told by people who visited him, only met him once or twice, stayed to be treated by him, are almost as extraordinary as fairy tales. With his magical insight he saw straight into their core; recognized BACK TO THE SOURCE 107 them as an individual person in a way they had never felt recognized before. And certainly that's one side of the coin. But there is the other side, too -- which is that Jung couldn't have been less interested in what we think of as the individual. It was only the impersonal realm beyond every personal undertone or overtone, the objective behind the subjective, that held his attention. Those around him were perfectly aware of the fact. His wife, always his strongest supporter and defender, could hardly have been blunter in her observation that he showed no interest in people at all "unless they exhibited archetypes": unless they allowed something larger than the human, something numinous, to show through. And Jung's own language was just as plain. The people who came into his life only concerned him if they had something from the world of the sacred to convey to him, tell him, show him. "The moment Id seen through them, the magic was gone." It was the daimonic power inside him, he explains, that ruthlessly and impersonally decided who would hold any interest for him -- and for how long. He had little conscious power or choice in the matter; was forced by something far greater to keep constantly moving, hurting himself as well as others, destroying friendships, creating bitterness and resentment, leaving acquaintances far behind.' To be sure, on a certain level the reality of the individual was always absolutely central for him. His whole view of life, especially as he got older, circled around the question of how individuals can find the inner courage to take a stand against "the spiritual and moral darkness" of governments which have grown far too powerful and seem destined to become even more intrusive in future. 108 PART TWO But the trouble is that what Jung meant by warning against this moral and spiritual darkness, what he was pointing to in trying to shake people out of becoming just submissive and servile servants of the state, is something much more radical than most sensitive modern individualists might expect. Constantly he kept trying to warn about the living presence everywhere of forces that are working all the time to trick us into staying asleep. Even when writing his most rarefied essays about alchemy he couldn't resist ending with a loud cry warning about Lucifer, the diabolical seducer, "the father of lies whose voice in our time, supported by press and radio, revels in orgies of propaganda and leads untold millions to ruin' -- and is also perfectly capable of brainwashing us into believing we are individuals just because we think we can decide what colour car to buy, which television channel to watch, which spiritual practice to select for the coming week. The fact is that, for Jung, nothing was more destructive of the individual than the collective western cult of the individual. And to be a true individual by becoming aware of the archetypal forces that, from moment to moment, are shaping even our most intimate and seductive thoughts: this is the coldest, loneliest thing for anyone to do."° The real trouble here, perhaps the most crucial problem of all in approaching Jung, already begins from the time when he was making his way into and out of the underworld while starting work on the Red book. On a superficial reading anyone could mistake this book of his for a celebration, even a gospel, of the individual: encouraging people to find their own truth and just live it regardless of anything or anyone else. It's only when one begins to read a little deeper that the underlying message starts making its way out -- that the path towards becoming a true individual involves BACK TO THE SOURCE 109 suffering and being tortured to a degree which is unimaginable, being ground down into nothing, having any and every illusion of ever being a genuine individual stripped away. And it was out of Jung's almost ritualistic work in producing the Red book that the most essential aspect of his whole psychology, what he called the process of individuation, dramatically evolved. But as for what he meant by this process of individuation: that's a fascinating story in itself. Just the same as with the workings of alchemy, it's the most natural process in the world -- although nothing could be rarer. It demands a certain consciousness, but our usual consciousness only gets in the way and blocks it; interferes. Also, it has nothing at all to do with becoming some kind of individualist. As Jung himself tried to explain: "Individuation is not that you become an ego -- you would then become an individualist. You know, an individualist is a man who did not succeed in individuating; he is a philosophically distilled egotist. Individuation is becoming that thing which is not the ego, and that is very strange. Therefore nobody understands what the self is, because the self is just the thing which you are not, which is not the ego ... something exceedingly impersonal, exceedingly objective.""! And please note that it's not I who am saying nobody un- derstands this: it's Jung himself. And he is quite right, because in the process he is describing there is no one left to understand. As for what he says here about the extreme objectivity and impersonality of the state involved, this is exceedingly important. It's a theme he sometimes weaves into and out of. But nowhere else does he mention it with as much power, or elegant simplicity, as during the course of a short talk he specifically dictated for his memoirs when he was already in his eighties -- and that ended up being silently excluded from his published biography. 110 PART TWO He describes the lonely, and solitary, process of individuation as this: as the inner process of dying "before surrendering oneself to the impersonal". His reference here is to the ancient mystical theme of dying before you die; to the mysterious process of being forced at some stage to withdraw from society, then being taken down into the underworld only to end up stripped of everything before being reborn, which in the history of western culture is associated especially with figures such as Empedocles or Parmenides. And this is why he would explain his particular kind of psychological training, the Jungian style of analysis, as a process of dying.' But that's not all he has to say here. On the contrary: he also presents individuation as a secret that has to remain a total mystery because, in approaching it, even the slightest possibility of human comprehension comes to a very abrupt and sudden end. By its very nature, the whole subject is such a secret that it's something no one will ever be able to grasp or understand. And he explains, in detail, how the mystery of individuation is the mystery of the Grail. This, significantly enough, is the very same text I already mentioned earlier -- the same talk where Jung speaks out about how centrally, how crucially, important for him the archetype of the knight happens to be because it's only by adhering to the unwritten laws of chivalry that the Grail can ever be won. The secret of individuation is that the one and only way to discover the Grail is by being it. It will forever remain undiscovered, and undiscoverable, except by simply becoming it. And here is where he is able not just to state, as he so often does elsewhere, that individuation is always only for the very few. This is where, thanks to the ancient imagery and mythology of the Grail legend which he also shows he considers his own, he is able to explain why. BACK TO THE SOURCE 111 The quest demands everything. People can have as many romantic dreams, as many collective fantasies, as they want. The reality, though, is that the ordeal is far too hard. Almost no one can endure it. And those who think they are equipped to make sense of it or communicate it to others -- they are the most unequipped of all. This, as it were, is the quintessential myth behind Jung's psychology: the myth of individuation." But, needless to say, we are left with a very different picture nowadays. Instead of individuation as a sacred mystery intended only for the unflinching eyes of the few, we are confronted with individuation democratized -- thrown into the public sphere, open and free for all. And of course this would be just wonderful, if anybody had the remotest idea what's really involved. The most vocal of Jungians are quick to insist it was Jung himself who claimed that the fully individuated state is everybody's birthright: that, at least in theory, it ought to be capable of paving the way for a truly evolved humanity through "a Christification of many". What they mysteriously agree to leave out, stay quite silent about, is how he would go straight on to add that there is not a hope in hell of this ever happening with humans the way they are. If most people were to get even the faintest taste of this Christification, the slightest whiff of this truly individuated state, they'd explode with uncontainable hubris and inflation; and then the world would end up even worse than it already is. Time and again the identical phenomenon repeats itself like clockwork. Jung gives the clearest warnings. The warnings are ignored. He states how things could have been or should be -- only to explain why, due to collective ignorance and unconsciousness, 112 PART TWO it's impossible for them to be that way. But his explanations are mutely, unceremoniously thrown aside." And if you were to ask why Jung's own direct warnings, explanations, qualifications are so blatantly pushed away I'd have to say: because of that very same ignorance and unconsciousness Jung was so persistent in warning about. Here there is no mystery whatsoever. All we have is precisely that hubris he was describing, the identical inflation, acting itself out in front of our eyes. But it's being acted out not by some ignorant members of the public -- simply by very foolish Jungians. Naturally the thrill, for fools, of ignoring warnings offered to fools is undeniable. At the same time there is really nothing to compare with the sheer rush which comes from being able to stand up in public and beat the drum on behalf of what one Jungian describes, with pride, as "a psychology that purports to offer to all a more or less clear map of the territory of "individuation". But the fact is that aside from his often contradictory hints, not to mention his outright warnings about the risks and dangers of even trying to walk a path so razor-sharp, Jung wasn't in the business of providing recipes or theories or rules. The simple truth is that, whatever he appeared to do or say, he was no more offering a map "to all" than those ancient Hermetic teachers he admired so much who seemed to be doing such a fine job of offering people some concrete guidance -- only to confuse their pupils stupid, almost drive their students crazy by systematically undoing everything they used to think they knew.' And the even simpler reality is that what he was offering was completely off any map, modern or ancient. Just like the Hermetic writers he knew so well, what he was ultimately pointing to was life in God and through God. 114 PART TWO To be more precise, he was offering immortality -- opening a path to the experience of deification, of becoming a god. This is not some fancy manner of speech, though. It may not have been something he wanted to make public, for obvious reasons. Even so, it was the inner world in which Jung lived and had his being. It was a world he might pull back the veil from, for those close to him. And it was the world out of which his most important work, the Red book, would emerge." There again, any serious player nowadays in the Jungian field is almost bound to feel embarrassed enough to insist there's no way he really meant any of these things. Heaven forbid that he ever intended such old-fashioned nonsense to be taken liter- ally. After all, he was a modern psychologist -- not some religious teacher or preacher of metaphysical truths. But in saying that, the only thing they show is how totally they have misunderstood his message and meaning."" ToJung, being a psychologist wasn't some magical entitlement to strip everything cynically down to a reductive explanation. On the contrary, it meant the incomparable privilege of being allowed to act humbly and without pretension as a servant in the one arena where the real drama of humanity's spirit is acting itself out: the human psyche. As for the whole problem of religion or metaphysics, what he couldn't stand was the literalists and dogmatists who twist everything into some rigidly theoretical or moralizing formula. The only thing he was after was the living reality behind the fancy words; and all the struggling, forcing oneself, imitating, copying, inventing pious fictions is pointless when that reality is just another way of referring to nature. For him it was simply a task of bringing the reality at the core of religion back from the realms of metaphysics and dogma to where it belongs, inside the human soul. As for the essential BACK TO THE SOURCE 115 nature of his psychology, which so many influential religious figures would come to view with uncontrollable trembling and fear, he is very clear: "Psychology is concerned with the act of seeing and not with the construction of new religious truths". And as for what he means here by seeing, he is even clearer. He means restoring what he calls our inner vision -- which in most of us has been covered over and almost completely obliterated -- because "we cannot understand a thing until we have experienced it inwardly".!® That was why he dared to infuriate people or hopelessly con- fuse others by describing the Christ as, in effect, a symbol of our own inner self. Only too often this is interpreted as meaning Christ was no longer a living reality for him but had just become a psychological symbol. In actual fact, that's the exact reverse of the truth. To understand anything about Jung one first has to under- stand, and then remember, that for him there was no such thing as "just" a symbol. On the contrary, to him a true symbol was far more potent and intensely alive than the whole of our so-called reality."" And when he comes to explain the Christ, symbol of our own self, this is how he defines it: as "an inner experience, an assimilation of Christ into the psychic matrix, a new realization of the divine Son" or, more simply, as "the 'Christ within". To make things even plainer, he described his role as being to shift our collective focus away from "the idea of the historical Christ" towards the reality of Christ as an "immediate and living presence". And the beauty of making this shift is that suddenly everything gets turned back to front; upside down. Instead of me seeking to imitate the Christ of history, it's the Christ of ancient stories and legends who starts imitating the changes that silently take place inside my soul. 116 PART TWO Perhaps this will all sound very mystical. If it wasn't mysti- cal, it wouldn't be so hard to understand. And besides, as Jung himself goes to great lengths to explain, that's just what it is.*° At the same time it has nothing whatsoever to do with the crony mysticism he so justifiably despised: the mysticism of superstitious people cluttered by their esoteric bibles and beliefs which he hated being accused of because, with everyone's muddled fears on the subject, nobody knows how to tell what's what or frankly even cares. The reality is that, with his emphasis on direct seeing and immediate experience, Jung had pushed into a realm where any tidy or theoretical distinction between science and mysticism becomes impossible to make -- in very much the same way that distinguishing between mysticism and science was utterly meaningless at the beginnings of our western world, with the great scientific pioneers such as Pythagoras or Parmenides or Empedocles. For them, their science was an outgrowth of their mystical attitude and practice just as naturally as a flower is the outcome of a bud. For them, too, their emphasis was not on thinking or theorizing or speculating but on actually seeing: on seeing the obvious, on learning the obscure art of noticing what's right in front of one's nose." And from this point of view, where what Jung was trying to do is neither strictly mystical nor merely scientific and yet both at the same time, his psychology never offered even the remotest threat to religious experience. Instead, it was meant to be like a magnet pointing constantly to the secret at the heart of religion. Its central aim, as he worked so hard to describe, is to explain how the natural inner work of transformation becomes "no longer a struggle, the very deliberate effort involved in imitation, but rather an involuntary experience of the reality depicted by BACK TO THE SOURCE 117 sacred legend. This reality comes knocking'" -- it arrives by itself, spontaneous, uninvited, unannounced. This is the actual, psychological experience of God in the human soul. And this, contrary to everything we are taught but as Jung himself insisted, is not just some subjective or purely personal experience. It's the exact opposite. The experience of God is the first objective experience available to us in our lives. All the rest is subjective confusion and chaos. And to take this line of under- standing one, little step further: the experience of God is the only real experience we humans can ever have. This is the logic behind Jung's explicit statement -- in the last major book he ever wrote -- that even our most basic assumptions about the workings of a mystical, or alchemical, or psychological path are pure illusions. We like to think it's we who are treading the path; progressing; being transformed. But that's not the case at all, because it's not our ego who walks the path. It's our higher self: the hidden, divine reality inside us. It never was about us. It was always about the sacred -- only about the divine." Then there is the part inside each of us that's likely to be untouched and unconvinced by any of this. Here is where you may say, with every good reason, that we have come a very long way from the day-to-day actuality of Jung as healer concerned with the ordinary drudgery of human suffering. And if you were to ask what all this has to do with psychotherapy, or the facts of sickness, the answer is -- everything. Jung was always looking through the personal in the people around him for a glimpse of the impersonal; looking past the individual to the archetypal. That's just a part of the story, though, because it wasn't only people who had to be transparent or serve as open windows into another world if they were going to catch his attention. It was the same with their sicknesses, too. In one letter he wrote, which would soon become notorious because it captured his intentions so well, he stated very directly to an acquaintance: "You are quite right, the main interest of my work is not concerned with the treatment of neuroses but rather with the approach to the numinous. But the fact is that the approach to the numinous is the real therapy and inasmuch as you attain to the numinous experiences you are released from the curse of pathology. Even the very disease takes on a numinous character." BACK TO THE SOURCE 119 In other words, even a neurosis only interested Jung if -- hovering over its surface -- he could see the shadow of the divine. For him everybody, everything, served its own proper purpose as an "approach to the numinous'". Anyone who pointed in this direction was right: it's the numinous that happens to be real, not the neurosis. And of course that means there is a tremendous danger, when trying to heal a person with any conventional therapy, of killing what's most precious; getting rid of what's most real. A magnificent success in terms of medicine could be the most tragic failure, a murder of the soul. As for this expression, "numinous": it was a special favourite of Jung's. One could explain the word as serving to convey a sense of the sacred, or the presence of the divine -- which would be fair enough. But there is a far better and more honest way of explaining what he meant. The numinous is, very simply, the experience of the impos- sible in our lives. And that raw impossibility somehow never fits too well into human systems." At the same time, there is no limit to human resourcefulness in escaping the impossible. And this is why, today, whole books are being industriously published by Jungians about the numi- nous. In fact it's only too easy to forget that, with a subject as potent and elusive, intelligent discussion is the best possible way of persuading the reality behind the word to disappear. Talking very learnedly and articulately about the numinous is what Jung himself used to refer to as an "apotropaic" form of language -- attempting to speak nicely and politely and ever so welcomingly about something in the deep, unconscious hope it will go away. And if you care to look, you will see how far away it's gone. As Jung himself prophetically warned: "You'll think up clever truisms, preventive measures, secret escape routes, excuses, 120 PART TWO potions capable of inducing forgetfulness". That's exactly what we have in the empty words invented for transforming the impossible into multiple opportunities and turning the numinous into something intended to serve the individual, instead of the other way around. Domesticating the gods, taming the numinous by discreetly neutralizing it, has become all the rage. Jung, himself, had once called the actual practice of psychotherapy for what it almost always is: "a mere expedient, which prevents numinous experiences as much as possible". The only thing he perhaps was not aware of is how accurately he was describing the kinds of beneficent therapy that would soon be practised in his name -- because the sacred never has been, or will be, a convenient stepping stone along our personal way to self-fulfilment. On the contrary, it's our individuality together with all our problems as a person which is just a stone in the approach to the impossible.** For Jung the numinous power of the sacred was something that always, whatever anyone might try to say, had him by the scruff of the neck. Its wildness and unpredictability ruthlessly drove him; ripped through his life and the lives of those around him even while providing him with the stability he needed; forced him especially at his very best to become a willing par- ticipant in its unfolding, "like it or not"; made him go out to fight like a knight, nature against nature, in a battle where the winners are losers and the victory is only given to those who surrender everything. To Jung, himself, there never could be any escaping the fact that we are tools of the numinous whose only hope is to become conscious tools and wise ones. Nothing would be more foolish than to imagine we can turn the numinous into a tool of our own. But now the tables have all been turned. BACK TO THE SOURCE 121 Experience of the numinous has found itself converted into the tool of tools: been hammered and reshaped into a "therapeutic resource" to which Jungians alone can proudly lay claim. And it's so easy to forget the things that, not so long ago, Jung himself once said about Lucifer. He explained how at the dawn of a civilization every spiri- tual truth only exists to point straight back to God, the creator. But towards the evening of any civilization just before it plunges into darkness -- which for a culture that forgot itself is the time of Lucifer, diabolical seducer -- spiritual truths are ever so subtly exploited until they end up "becoming no more than a tool in the hand of man"."° Really it's quite an achievement how in the space of a single generation, regardless of any effort to cling to Jung's original vision, Jungian psychology has already been dragged through every stage of a civilization: all the way from its beginning to its ultimate degradation. Perhaps, though, you should forget I ever said that. After all, it's more than a little awkward to have to listen to a grown man like Carl Jung talking about the power of Lucifer as if this was something real. And there is something just as uncom- fortable about having to hear him describe his mystical foolery in agreeing to follow the path of Christ because he so much "wanted God to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason more than God's secret intentions". But that's not even to mention the way he still, just a few months before he died, insisted on siding with a Native American elder who saw the light of the whole world right at the final edge of being extinguished by western rationalism -- or the way Jung himself added that all he can do now in his old age is privately guard his own light and treasure because "it is most precious not only to me, but above all to the darkness of the creator". 122 PART TWO Maybe it will be best if I simply stay silent about his absolute certainty that, in the people who came to him for healing, one thing was more essential than anything else: a deeply religious attitude, the sense that it's all for the sake of something far greater than ourselves. Otherwise, everything that in theory could go wrong is guaranteed to go wrong. And no doubt I should avoid saying a single word about his absurd conviction that the best way of supporting a truly religious attitude is to help people step out of their personal dramas so they can find a place for themselves in history and at last experience a real "sense of historical continuity" -- because without that sense of historical continuity no genuine or enduring healing is possible and, as a matter of fact, no escape from the threat of individual or collective inflation is even conceivable. Or then again, it might just possibly be time to offer a brief reminder of what Jung himself described as authentic psycho- therapy. The situation he was faced with could hardly have been more paradoxical because, already early on, he had realized that the decisive question for every person is: Is that individual knowingly "related to something infinite or not?" If not, that apparent individual's life is wasted; a dead end. This is what makes the personality as well as the work of Jung so numinously fascinating -- the fact that every thought of his was centred on the divine. And for him even the individual patients sitting inside his consulting room could fade into insignificance because, in spite of his meticulous attention to the incarnated details of this finite world, the main focus of his work lay somewhere else. His fundamental concern was with the soul of humanity. It was with the great work of the alchemists, their opus magnum. It was with the most burdensome, but numinous, of undertakings BACK TO THE SOURCE 123 that makes one consciously feel and often have to carry the whole weight of humanity's problems on one's shoulders. This isn't just a job. It's a supreme responsibility: a divine responsibility, a sacred task.*° And perhaps here is where we are brought face to face with the greatest irony of all in Jung's psychology. With incomparable intensity he worked at handing down a host of techniques and strategies of therapy, of potent aids along the mysterious path of individuation, which Jungians have busily applied to making their clients' lives more fulfilling as well as bearable -- more personally enriching, far more humanly whole. No one seems to have considered, though, that in the transmission something essential might have gone missing; got lost. And no amount of appropriate qualifications or lip service, of saying all the right words without the understanding of what they mean, c4n ever hope to make up for it. As Jung himself made the effort to say: the mystery of indi- viduation is the mystery of the Grail. But Grail legend speaks very plainly about the one crucial question that has to be asked -- just like Jung's question about whether each individual is related to something infinite, or not -- before the Grail itself can be won. Until then, the whole earth remains desolate; wasted; dead. You might suppose you know the general direction in which the Grail is to be found. You may even be ever so confident you have it in your grasp. But without that one question being asked, then answered, it's not just that all your own accomplished efforts are ultimately pointless -- all your strivings for personal individuation utterly useless. Even the world around you is going to be lifeless. And for the real life to come back, nothing is more import- ant than to know that magical question which has to be asked: Whom does the Grail serve?' Jung visited India just once, in his early sixties. The visit was filled with thrills and insights and excitements. But, as usual, when Jung needed to get sick he got sick -- and was forced back inside himself. Just after being released from hospital in the wildly bewil- dering city of Kolkata he had a dream that at first bewildered him too, and would end up leaving an enormous impression on him: as much as any other dream he would ever have. For him, the geographical realities had a dramatically para- doxical effect. It was precisely through being so far away from Europe, so distant in Asia from the hearth and home of western culture, that Jung found himself confronted at last with the mystery of western civilization -- and the secret of his role. Instead of getting lost in the sights and smells and sounds of the East, he was simply using the whole experience as a chance to plunge into the depths of himself: exactly what the ancient Greek philosophers recommended."* And this very same dream of his happens to be what, ap- propriately enough, would prompt him in his old age to start speaking out about the secret of individuation as well as about the archetype of the knight -- because this was his dream of the Grail. BACK TO THE SOURCE 125 Physically in his Kolkata hotel room, he found himself on an island just off the coast of southern England. Together with a group of Swiss friends and colleagues he had come to a medieval castle at the southernmost tip of the island: the castle of the Grail. But Jung felt almost overwhelmingly alone in his awareness that the Grail and the home of the Grail and all the traditions about the Grail aren't only a matter of history or literature. On the contrary, they are vitally meaningful; absolutely alive. Then comes the main part of the dream -- long, slow, brutally arduous. The Grail is missing and has to be found: needs to be brought back from such a small, nondescript house that no one would ever guess it had been hidden there. And it has to be brought back today, straight away. Jung sets off, towards the north, still accompanied by people from his group. They march for hours. The land becomes more and more desolate; the sun sets and the darkness sets in instead. Finally they come to the sea and realize the island is split into two but there is not a single bridge, or boat, or road. Frozen, exhaust- ed, everyone falls asleep one by one until only Jung is left awake. And then he realizes that he, alone, is going to have to strip off his clothes and swim across the channel to fetch the Grail. As a dream this has all the presence, and atmosphere, of something numinous. But just as striking as the dream itself is the way Jung chose to explain it. If a psychologist was to want to help point the way towards an interpretation, it would be easy enough to suggest taking every single detail as simply an expression or reflection of the dreamer''s internal state: as a comment from the unconscious on one person's private search for an inner meaning. But that's not at all how Jung read or saw it. To him it wasn't just about some individual quest for psychological integration. It was about his work in -- and for 126 PART TWO the sake of -- the whole world. As his biography, with a sense of fatefulness, starts describing: "Myths that day has forgotten continue to be told by night, and powerful figures which consciousness turns into mere banalities and has reduced to ridiculous trivialities are resurrected by poets and prophetically revived." And then it only takes a moment before we are hearing Jung begin to explain how, "imperiously, the dream wiped away all the intense daytime impressions of India and swept me back to the far too long neglected concerns of the West which had once expressed themselves in the quest for the Holy Grail as well as in the search for the philosophers' stone. I was taken out of the world of India and reminded, in the process, that India was not my task but only a part of the path -- admittedly a significant one -- which would bring me closer to my goal. It was as if the dream was asking me, "What are you doing in India? It would be far better if you were to seek for yourself and for the sake of your fellow humans the healing vessel, the servator mundi, which you urgently need. For your state is perilous; you are all in imminent danger of destroying all that centuries have built up.'"?? I really wonder how many of the thousands of people who have read these words ever registered, on a conscious level, what they mean. In fact they are saying something extremely specific. To get to the place of understanding that specific something, though, almost inevitably involves the same kind of ordeal Jung himself was forced to go through in his dream. Visiting India is all very nice and fine. Experiencing other cultures, getting a taste of the delicious East, being touched and even transformed by its spiritual traditions, can be very helpful in a certain round-about sort of way. But none of this would have any value for Jung except in bringing him back to what truly matters and helping him BACK TO THE SOURCE 127 remember what, on the deepest level, his entire life was about. Its only point was to return him to the realization of his real task and work, of his one duty and obligation and responsibility -- to play the long-forgotten role of healer to the West. For him, nothing could possibly be more important. The need is urgent: urgent beyond any words. The peril is all around us. [he danger of total destruction is imminent. But it's precisely when the need is most pressing and the peril is most immediate that people are least able to recognize the nature of the danger -- let alone to explain to themselves, or others, the sense of urgency they feel. To be sure, there are those who have struggled to convey the fact that Jung's task was cultural rather than individual. To earth these intuitions, though, to ground and locate them in space and time: that's a rather different matter. And the trouble is that our culture has grown so sick there is not even a context or framework left for understanding what any of this actually means -- because the awareness of what a culture is has just become a thing of the past. This is why so many Jungians have flown off into grandiose fantasies about Jung as some culture hero personally inaugurating a glorious new age by leaving all the trash of Christianity and western materialism behind. But this insanely inflated nonsense has nothing whatsoever to do with the way Jung perceived his own task. For him nothing new is possible without plunging back into the past -- behind all of the dirt and materialism, the misunderstandings and corruptions, murders and perversions and distortions -- in search of the secret at the heart of one's own culture. The core of his task was to rediscover the essential mystery of the West that so urgently needs to be treasured and guarded, protected and preserved, because only this can provide salvation: not some fantasies about an imaginary future.*° 128 PART TWO And here is where we find ourselves staring straight into the face of the major problem which has dogged students of Jung, as well as his critics, for years. That's the problem of his attitude to eastern religions and spiritual practices. Certainly the seriousness of the problem is obvious enough. On the one hand, he praises to the heavens the insights offered by eastern traditions into the study of psychology and into the infinite intricacies of the human soul. On the other hand he felt an intense disgust for westerners taking up exotic practices of self-cultivation, or surrendering themselves to eastern forms of spirituality, which erupted into almost desperate bouts of impatience and irritability. And, only too predictably, scholars have reacted by picking at his arguments or trying to tear his reasoning apart with even more anger and irritation." If we take a look underneath the surface, though, it's so easy to see what Jung was really trying to say below all the things he did say. Thanks to the utter bankruptcy of rampant materialism and modern Christianity, many sensitive westerners even as young- sters instinctively turn to the East -- turn anywhere -- to fill the terrible emptiness of meaning they have been brought up in. And the kind of nourishment they find in eastern spiritual teachings or teachers can help to a significant extent to provide what they, as individuals, need. But we are not just the individuals we seem to be. And now, whether we know it or not, we have a collective obligation to rediscover western culture's original purpose: have an inescapable duty, as westerners, to face up to the full reality of what we lost. Jung lays this out with a clarity, almost a savagery, that perfectly describes the situation we find ourselves in today. At the same time he effortlessly manages to undermine all our modern pretensions; our treasured assumptions and political correctnesses. BACK TO THE SOURCE 129 This is why in his memorial lecture for Richard Wilhelm, the Chinese scholar he had come to love and respect so much, he outlined a scenario that would have been more or less un- imaginable when he was speaking almost a century ago -- and with a darkly, almost perversely prophetic humour explained what others were far too pious to see. Times were changing, he noted. Instead of western mis- sionaries pouring out everywhere across the East to convert people with their gospel as energetically and methodically as they could, Christianity had become so exhausted that Buddhists were getting ready to seize their own opportunities because they realized now was the perfect moment for positioning themselves to start becoming missionaries to the West. And in case some sincere listeners or readers were to wonder just where Carl Jung stood on such a delicate matter, he goes straight on to throw any doubt aside. For him, those westerners who would unhesitatingly open the gates of their own culture to the Buddhists weren't open-minded multiculturalists. They were "spiritual beggars" who would blindly accept whatever handouts the East in its apparent generosity decided to offer -- and in spite of all the talk about mindfulness, would practise the mindlessness of imitating other people's nobly spiri- tual truths. "That is the danger about which it is impossible to give too many warnings', he added: as if, once again, anyone would have the slightest interest in heeding Jung's warnings. Then he continues following the thread of his logic, so unfamiliar but so precise at the same time. "What the East has to give us should be merely a help in a work which we still have to do. Of what use to us is the wisdom of the Upanishads or the insights of Chinese yoga if we abandon the foundations of our own culture as though they were outlived errors and, like homeless pirates, settle with thievish intent on foreign shores?" 130 PART TWO And for him it all points back to darkness, back to that dark- ness every westerner so desperately wants to escape from -- not just our personal darkness, which is hard enough to confront, but the darkness of a whole corrupted culture and civilization. This is where everything has to come back to, because the light of real wisdom "only shines in the dark": in the darkness of our own hell. If we want to experience the benefits of eastern wisdom, any wisdom, first we have to do the impossible work of coming to terms with the western truth about ourselves. That's where the path really begins -- with the realization that the only light which is going to be of any genuine use or value to us is thd light we manage to bring, like a new sun, out from the darkness inside ourselves. Without such an awareness, which still belongs shovelled away into some forgotten footnote, all the most potent medi- tation or yoga practices in the world are nothing but a recipe for even greater forgetfulness; are only going to delude us by leading us further and further astray.* And these weren't just the thoughts of a man who was sad at the death of a friend. Almost ten years earlier he had written what seems to have been a mysteriously poetic letter to an Englishwoman. As for the essence of what he evidently told her, it's summed up in the one direct statement that "Gnosis should be an experience of your own life, a plant grown on your own tree. Foreign gods are a sweet poison, but the vegetable gods you have raised in your own garden are nourishing. They are perhaps less beautiful, but they have stronger medicine." There is an underlying principle here -- just as there is in the warning at the start of the Red book, "Don't be greedy to gobble up the fruits of foreign fields." This is that real spirituality is not about gawking at exotic scenery: that's far too easy. It's about BACK TO THE SOURCE 131 finding a way back to the sacred landscape, however horrifically desolate or abandoned it might feel, which somehow got lost and forgotten inside ourselves. It's about learning to find one's own nourishment and medicine, however modest at first, as opposed to begging; starving; being made to swallow poison. And, above all, it's about rediscovering the ancient art of healing instead of joining the collective steady downward spiral into sickness and illusion and death. Otherwise even one's best possible efforts to create, or try to enlighten, or be of help, simply hurry along the destruction. But as to what that healing could be, what the healing vessel is which Jung had to labour so hard in his dream to search for, what the particular nutrition is which he struggled throughout his life just to make available: this is something utterly impossible to understand on the level of the rational mind. Our rational mind is what hid it away in the first place. And reasoning will gladly either keep on trampling it underfoot in its ruthless march towards some global ideal of fulfilment, or go on twisting and distorting it beyond any recognition. There is only one possible way to make any sense of this at all, and that's with what Jung referred to as the "plant-like naiveté" which intuitively realizes a culture is not just some theoretical abstraction. On the contrary, it's an organism that lives and dies; a plant; a tree.** Our only real duty and purpose is to return far enough to the root of our civilization that we can remember -- then help it remember -- its sacred purpose and task. And, naturally, the only question is how. One of Jung's favourite themes was this: that the most precious of treasures lies ignored, totally neglected by people out in gutters and streets. And true enough, there are things stated quite openly in his name which most of us prefer not to notice because we are far more comfortable picking up the little crumbs from here and there. As for the elusive mystery that always works to bring everything together, the mystery Empedocles simply called "the whole", it's so much easier just to pass it by." The published account of Jung's crucial Kolkata dream culminates in its pressing message to him to "seek for yourself and for the sake of your fellow humans the healing vessel, the servator mundi, which you urgently need". Of course his fondness for using Latin can be a little off-putting in a world where the language has been virtually forgotten. But he had his good reasons for doing so, because this was how he could hint at the history of what he was trying to convey -- a history stretching back hundreds and thousands of years into the depths of western culture. Servator mundi is an older form of sa/vator mundi and means preserver or saviour of the world. In ancient and then medieval texts they were both standard ways of referring to Jesus Christ. BACK TO THE SOURCE 133 Inside the Latin alchemical literature Jung was so familiar with, it's exactly the same story. And whenever Jung himself used one or the other, Christ is always either named explicitly or very present in the background. Needless to say, the healing vessel of the Grail was a symbol associated closely with the presence and the body of Christ. But by using this particular expression -- servator mundi, cosmic protector or preserver -- he was making the link that binds Christ to the central essence of his own work and duty and labour far tighter, stronger, closer.* To associate Jung's work nowadays with religious ideas about saving the world is, it goes without saying, enough to get anyone crucified instantly. All sorts of theoretical disagreements about the details or practical meaning of his psychology are tolerated, even encouraged. That doesn't include this, though. And there is more than a touch of irony about the fact that those progressive Jungians who feel terrified at the prospect of waking up one morning marked with the stigmata of religiosity are quite oblivious to how openly this theme of salvation is available for everybody to read, veiled by the lightest coating of Latin, in Jung's own authorized biography.*° There, it's no question of him just functioning as a good Christian. It was a matter of working directly with the innermost reality of the Christ -- and especially with Christ's essential aspect as saviour of the world. But all this is no more than the beginning. The original record still survives of what Jung said to his secretary, during one of their interview sessions, about the dream he had in Kolkata. And it includes several details that, for more or less obvious reasons, never made their way into print. First there is that mention of the Swiss friends and acquaintances who kept with him as far as the castle of the 134 PART TWO Grail, then went on marching to the place where at last the land came to an end. Jung himself specifies, more than once, that in real life all these dream companions of his were members of the Psychological Club he had helped to create at Zurich as a meeting-place for people attracted to his work. He also tells how he and they arrived at the castle as sight- seers, which suggests he was intensely aware on a certain level that the circle of early Jungians who gathered around him all shared the same basic attitude of psychological or spiritual tourists: were simply there for the view. They might be willing to make a certain effort, but were only prepared to go so far. And then there is the most fascinating piece of information which the published version of Jung's biography made sure to leave out. The first spontaneous comment he offers as soon as he has finished telling his dream relates to the final scene, where all the people around him fall asleep and -- completely on his own -- he has to make the supreme effort to fetch the Grail. There they all are, he exclaims: the young disciples at Gethsemane who have fallen asleep, leaving the Christ to face his destiny completely alone. And here is where everything comes together, where the story completes itself -- because in his alchemical studies Jung had been very careful to note that "Christ in the garden of Gethsemane' is none other than the servator mundi, "preserver of the cosmos".*" But now of course there is one entirely new complexion to this whole affair, which is that Jung is no longer just the brave knight dedicated to rediscovering at all costs the healing vessel of the servator mundi. He has become the healing vessel himself: Christ the preserver, saviour of the world. And here, too, is where all these interesting details become really fascinating -- because it's as if suddenly a back door has sprung open into Jung's own scientific writings. BACK TO THE SOURCE 135 Often he would rail and thunder about people who were vain or ambitious or unconscious enough to set themselves up as self-proclaimed world saviours. And now we can see why this is an issue that would have concerned him so intensely: because he himself knew exactly what it meant, precisely what it felt like, to be faced with the task of saving the world. Naturally we could just take a shallow breath and stop here: the same story as before. Nothing would be easier than to accuse Jung of blatant contradiction, even hypocrisy, and leave the matter at that. But it takes a little more courage and effort to consider that there might just be a right way, as well as a wrong way, to set about saving the world. | As for the wrong way: there is no mystery about that at all. Jung makes it perfectly clear that the trap so many unprepared people fall into is to identify with the archetypal image of the saviour and then, through the sheer naivety of their identification, fall victim to a massive inflation -- the almighty presumption of thinking they have literally become the one divine saviour themselves. He is even kind enough to hint at simple but practical aids for disidentifying from the seductively archetypal energies of the unconscious. No better supplement exists for psychologi- cal insight or understanding than the true virtues of love and wisdom, not to mention the healthy ability to laugh heartily at one's god-almighty little ego.** And just when all of a sudden everything seems so very clear, manageable, controllable, is the moment when those dangers of misunderstanding are far more present and palpable than ever before -- because the even deeper trap people fall into is of assuming that as soon as you break the identification with some- thing it dissolves automatically, magically vanishes, is gone. This is why it's such a terrible mistake to equate the experience of becoming a god with the inflationary state of 136 PART TWO god-almightiness that always accompanies it. If there was no difference between them we could just sit safe at home; never bother to risk or learn a thing. On the one hand, such inflatedness is nothing but the result of a tiny ego trying to identify itself with the imprint of the divine. Battling with these obnoxious manifestations of inflation is where any true psychology shows its worth because here -- in the overwhelming encounter with the sacred -- we only have the start of a psychological process, never the end. And to help guard against the inflatedness of imagining Jungian psychology is alone in having access to such sophisticated ideas, I should add that there are mystical traditions which have been well equipped to deal with such very human problems for centuries. That's hardly surprising, though, in view of Jung's own constant fondness for appealing to "the great psychotherapeutic systems which we know as the religions". But as for deification, on the other hand, this is an inexpress- ibly real experience that leaves its permanent mark on anybody touched by the fingers of the divine. It's what gave Jung much of his knowledge, as well as charisma; was a major initiation he had to pass through. In fact he could hardly have been blunter about the matter: if you just identify with the experience and make no effort to come to terms with it as a human, you'll end up in a mental hospital. Avoid the experience, though, and you are throwing the most valuable of gifts away.°? In short, try to walk away from it and it's sure to throw its shadow over you: haunt you for the rest of your meaningless nights and even emptier days. But if you learn the secret of how to relate to it consciously, then you'll find it settling as a new awareness halfway between you and the depths of your unconscious so that you are no longer overwhelmed by the forces which sweep over you -- and no longer need to overwhelm them. BACK TO THE SOURCE 137 Instead, there is a new harmony of mutual respect; the primordial state of divine awareness hidden away inside a human body without any of the grabbing or inflation or identification; the life in God. And there, protected from all our superficialities as well as stupidities, is where the world might just have to be saved each single moment with an urgency our egos could never come close to fathoming. In our collective human inflation we honestly think we can get away with fooling ourselves into assuming this world exists, and keeps existing, just for us to enjoy and exploit and destroy. Quite possibly it doesn't, though. And maybe it doesn't even keep going by itself. Perhaps human consciousness has always been the miraculous magic that's needed for the moon and sun to rise; to sustain and preserve the cosmos; keep it safe. But of course this would imply that to arrive at the place of discovering such a reality, deep inside, and being allowed to participate in it is the ultimate purpose of human existence -- at the same time as being the hardest, most arduous thing possible for a woman or man to do. It also would help to explain why mystical traditions such as Sufism, for example, are so keen to repeat that a few awakened people are always needed to keep this physical world connected to the world of reality, why they will sometimes even specify the exact number of truly conscious beings who have to live and stay alive at any time in any given country, for instance Syria. Without them and the quiet, invisible work they do "the cosmos would collapse". In other words, there is no question or problem about having to save the world: there never was. The only problem is all the fuss and obstacles we put in the way. The world needs saving. But it's precisely because we can't see this that the world is being destroyed. 138 PART TWO So we are brought straight back to Jung himself -- and his famous encounter with this very same understanding through his meeting, in New Mexico, with the Native American elder called Mountain Lake. It was a meeting of mind as well as heart which, aside from developing into a lasting friendship, would go on reverberating inside Jung for the rest of his life."° And as he kept summing that basic understanding up: the only true dignity for a human lies in knowing that the sun would never be able to rise without the human's assistance. It could never even set. I suppose so much talk about Native Americans and Sufis could be starting to sound wonderfully, intoxicatingly exotic. To be quite honest, though, there is nothing mysterious or mystical about it at all. The far greater mystery is how on earth people manage to forget that this is the way life exists, goes on existing: that the real work of saving the world has to be done, moment to moment, in a way hardly noticed or recognized by anyone. And the truth is that it has to go unrecognized, unnoticed -- most of the time even by oneself. 'The worst thing possible would be if the ego got to know about it, because then instantly it would be wanting to have a slice of the action; become implicated; get inflated; make a mess. If you are going to have to identify with something, make quite sure never to identify with this. The greater part of the task is to keep it pure, uninterfered with, safe above all from yourself. So be sure to stay invisible, leave few or no traces of what really matters, cover your tracks. The best solution is to learn how to trick everybody by gracefully putting your worst foot forward, playing to perfection the role of jovial bourgeois, even experimenting at being a reasonable scientist. And by the same token, the worst possible 140 PART TWO way of trying to carry Jung's real work forward would be by identifying oneself as a Jungian. In short, the point of a psychology such as his is not to put a stop to the work of salvation but to put a stop to all the childish inflations so that the real work of saving the world can continue unimpeded; undisturbed. It's to begin to discover and then live with the truth, which can sound so heretical from a conventionally therapeutic point of view, that the real reason for disidentifying from the archetypal energies is not so that we can be free from them but so that they can be free from us -- free to move and work as they need in this physical world, assisted by our consciousness but uncontami- nated by the unbecoming dramas of our human psychology. Without the ego's inappropriate attentions and identifications, the archetypal reality doesn't fade away or disappear. Quite to the contrary, it flourishes. But to get to the point of understanding how these things work takes a lifetime of struggle; of battles fought and lost. Jung called the mystery of individuation the secret of the Grail for a very good reason. There are all the sacrifices and hardships and heroics that come from going in quest of it, the noble chasing after even nobler causes -- plus the added benefit of being able to fall asleep at any point one chooses. At the same time, he also said what the secret of individua- tion is: explained that the one and only way to discover the vessel of the Grail, the servator mundi, is by becoming it. It will stay undiscovered, undiscoverable forever, except by simply being it. And such a simplicity usually only arrives, if one happens to be ever so lucky, in old age. We still happen to have a record of the letters exchanged by Jung -- it would be his last winter -- with an Englishman just a few months before he died. He complains about the overwhelming impossibility of the difficulties he is faced with, about the depths BACK TO THE SOURCE 141 of the darkness he finds himself immersed in, about how alone he feels in spite of the people he is surrounded by. The alone- ness as he describes it is strangely reminiscent of that aloneness he had experienced years earlier, right at the end of his Kolkata dream, when he realized there was no one else beside him in his search for the Grail. And the Englishman somehow finds it in himself to take a gamble, even at the obvious risk of provoking or antagonizing Jung. I've heard you repeating endlessly, he plucks up the courage to write, that you are not some medicine man to your people -- most certainly no world saviour. But in spite of all your public and consistent denials I am going to say this: To me, personally, nothing could be clearer than that the reference in the Gospel of John to the light which "shineth in the darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not" is the most exact pointer possible to your own situation. While ordi- nary people can sometimes be forced against their will to take on the role of hero, your case could hardly be more different. Right from the start you were shaped out of "the stuff heroes are made of"; you have a heroic destiny, a heroic burden heavily weighing on your shoulders. And just as the human Jesus had to die on the cross to bring light to other humans, it's the same with you. But "please forgive me for even suggesting this comparison". Nothing could have prepared him for the surprise of reading Jung's reply: "Your Biblical analogies are perfectly legitimate, as they are archetypic experiences, which are repeated again and again, whenever a new idea is born, or when a hero-child appears in the world. Time and again a light tries to pierce the darkness' -- although it's a law that the bringer of the light will always have to pay a heavy price for the attempt. Then Jung touchingly goes 142 PART TWO on to admit just how naive he was "in not expecting the darkness to be so dense". But the one statement he makes which stands out from everything else could hardly be simpler, or more enigmatic. "To live an archetypic life is no reason for an inflation as it is the ordinary life of man." To be sure, Jung was fond of emphasizing how ordinary a truly individuated person would seem to be: no loud individual- ism, no extravagant or fantastic claims. What he is saying here is much more than that, though. Typically, in earlier years and days, the very questionable honour of living an "archetypic life" would have been reserved by him for the central archetypal figure of the West: Jesus Christ. But here the veil between Christ's life and Jung's life has been torn away. All the huff and puff of a whole life's work -- the bitter struggle against inflation, the anguished warnings and tensions and denials -- has vanished in a moment. All the endless drama about needing for the sake of one's basic sanity to disidentify from the archetypal energies because of the inevitable inflation they cause is suddenly gone. To live an archetypic life is no reason, any more, to get inflated because "it is the ordinary life of man'."' Jung has finally managed to walk through the eye of the needle and find salvation through the danger he had always talked about. That's what it means to know how to keep moving with life; to be able to flow beyond oneself. Where he ends up is a place of such simplicity that it's hard for anyone to understand. For him the totally extraordinary has become the utterly ordinary which, what's more, was the normal state of humanity right from the start. And of course the other side to this -- because there is always the other side -- is that the apparent ordinariness of people who BACK TO THE SOURCE 143 go about their disconnectedly meaningless lives is the most extraordinary violation of what we humans are meant to be. It's this very same abnormal normalness, always ready with its bright excuses, which makes the light-bringer's task even more excruciatingly difficult. What Jung means here by an ordinary life is nothing like what we ordinarily think of as ordinary. For him, consciously living an archetypic life is the ordinary life of a human because ultimately the archetypes are all there is. To the extent that we are humans we participate in, we are, the archetype of humanity: the Anthropos, the Christ. As would-be humans we love trying to find a rock to hide away under, where we think we can protect ourselves from the archetypes' dark glare -- their impossible demands and strains. But as humans we are archetypes. And the stone is an arche- type, too. The irony is that to avoid the unbearable burden of living an archetypal life isn't a human option at all. Whatever we think of as personal is in fact profoundly inhuman, while it's only in the utter objectivity of the impersonal that we find our humanity. And inside that entirely impersonal objectivity is where we can come to the point at which the Anthropos and the anthropos, the primordial and the ordinary human, are one and the same: the smallest equal to the largest and the largest inside the smallest. Then you are not trying to illuminate people and save the world with your tedious possibilities in some ridiculously inflated fashion. Instead, you are allowing the impossibly simple energy of the saviour to do its work through you and finish whatever it needs to do. As Jung liked to say, no one can ever see or know where the saviour will come from. It can arrive in the flash of a truly 144 PART TWO new idea. It can appear in the sudden, unbelievable movement of letting somebody somewhere be completely cleansed and healed of guilt -- before vanishing as quickly as it came. But to incarnate inside oneself that presence of the saviour, to embody it: that's a totally different matter. And Jung makes himself very clear in his correspondence with the Englishman about the exact nature of that supposedly ordinary, but archetypal, life he has ended up being able to live without any inflation. It's the archetypal life of the light-bringer -- whom he has routinely equated in his other writings with Christ as servator munai, "the Saviour and Preserver of the world". But he also goes out of his way elsewhere to equate this figure of the light-bringer, who has to suffer for the ordinariness of other humans and whose burden as well as destiny Jung knew so well, with a reality that he notes has been completely suppressed and forgotten in the West. That's the figure of the cosmic Christ as Saviour, described with such unparalleled wisdom by the Gnostics thousands of years ago, "who went forth from the Father in order to illumi- nate the stupidity, darkness, and unconsciousness of mankind". The only thing to add is his own explanation -- already suppressed and almost forgotten -- that this benign movement of the Gnostic Christ into a darkened world precisely outlines, exactly defines, the real scope of Jungian psychology." Now, Jungian psychology exists in all sorts of shapes and forms and sizes for people to use -- or let themselves be charmed by -- as they choose. Once, though, it was no more than a trembling fear. And that's where the real magic lies. Through his initial confrontation with the depths of the unconscious -- at those points where the borderline keeps shifting between insanity and sanity, then back again -- all of a sudden Jung found himself terrifyingly alone. Or at least that was how he felt to begin with, until he fell straight into the lap of the Gnostics. With the help of surviving fragments from Gnostic writings -- which for the most part happened to be passages hatefully quoted by early Christian saints just to prove how perverse and dangerous their teachings were -- he came across people who had already experienced what he was experiencing. He recognized that he was in the presence of psychologists who managed to anticipate his psychology by two thousand years; found living friends, allies, companions; was no longer on his own. And not only were they still alive, deep down inside him. He realized, to his even greater surprise, that a part of him was still alive inside them." 146 PART TWO The Greek word gnéstikos means "knower" or "realizer". And Jung was quite right to emphasize that the people presented as ancient Gnostics by our history books weren't Christian heretics, in the way most history books would have us believe. Instead, they were the real source of Christianity; were the carriers of a non-Christian knowledge out of which Christian creeds and beliefs and dogmas would all evolve. In other words, it's not that the Gnostics were Christian heretics: it's that the Christians were Gnostic heretics. But, as Gnostics have always known, things do tend to get turned upside down and back to front inside our topsy-turvy world -- which you may already have noticed is exactly what keeps on happening, at every conceivable opportunity, with Jung's psychology." At the same time, words like gnéstikos or gnésis also have the strong underlying sense of being able to see directly; of inwardly perceiving, of intuitively recognizing as opposed to just believ- ing or accepting what others say. And there is something almost tragic about the inability of people to see that this direct Gnostic seeing is what lies right at the heart of his entire psychology. It's not for any lack of stating the case quite plainly. "Psychology is concerned with the act of seeing", as he patiently explains: with the immediate "inward experience" that depends on the "inner vision" which, itself, depends on our seriously atrophied "faculty of seeing"." But actually to recognize what Jung is trying to say can somehow seem the most difficult thing in the world -- in part. because the naturalness of this direct perception he is referring to has perhaps become so painfully unnatural to us, and in part because so much of the evidence that spells out just what he meant has been unavailable for such a long time. For instance there is the important letter he wrote to a close associate during March 1918, at a point when he was deeply BACK TO THE SOURCE 147 involved in extracting some sense from those experiences that form the bedrock of his Red book. This colleague, Josef Lang, was one of the few people who had stayed on with Jung after the famous break with Sigmund Freud; had played a privileged role, as Hermann Hesse's therapist, in passing along from Jung many of the Gnostic ideas that appear in Hesse's novels; and was a person Jung would be keen to collaborate with in the very conscious labour of shaping, defining, even promoting his own psychology as something easy to tell apart from the psychology of Freud. And in the letter he outlines two different sides to working with the unconscious. On the one hand, he explains, we need to confront and experience the unconscious directly before trying to impose our usual views or ideas or opinions on it -- have to face it in all the rawness of its essential reality without allowing any conscious influence or bias to interfere. But on the other hand we also have to come to grips with the essential meaning of the ancient Gnostic teachings, because only with the help that they provide will it be possible to create "the foundations for a theory of the unconscious spirit". Once again, in his own way Jung could hardly have stated things plainer. We have to learn to look and see, not just outwardly into the physical world but straight into our own unconscious. And if we are going to do so we need the solid support, the grounding or foundation, that only the Gnostics' unique insights into the unconscious can provide." These, if you like, have to be the two wings on the bird of Jungian psychology. And the most extraordinary thing here is not just that he is identifying the ancient tradition of the Gnostics as the only trustworthy source of knowledge available, anywhere in our 148 PART TWO conscious world, about how to confront the unconscious. It's that, while on the conscious side he looks for help in understanding the unconscious to the preserved writings of the Gnostics, the chief figures whom he meets deep down inside the unconscious are Gnostics. In other words, on every possible side he is surrounded by Gnostic tradition -- the same as in that famous image of the cosmic serpent swallowing its own tail. And more than one wing on this Jungian bird is Gnostic: they both are. That's not all, though, by any means; and it's not just that Gnosticism would come to play such an absolutely central role, for the most part unnoticed, in Jung's work. If possible, it would play an even more central role in his life -- because by making his way to the underworld he didn't only meet friends and companions. He also found his own teacher; or rather, his teacher found him. From Jung's authorized biography we have the beautiful image of Philemon flying into his life as an old man who sails across the sky with the wings of a kingfisher. And we have the lovely picture of Jung himself strolling up, then down, his garden absorbed in silent dialogue with this same old man he called his inner guru -- a pagan, we are told, with an exotic-sounding background as well as a certain "Gnostic coloration". But while we can be ever so grateful to his secretary for lend- ing her feminine touch to this charmingly pretty scene, it doesn't quite correspond to the whole story as Jung had wanted to tell it. From the unpublished records of what he actually said, the first detail that leaps out is his raw fear. He can hardly stop repeating how scared he was to begin with, how terrified on realizing that what he had assumed was just some aspect of himself in fact was something else -- was an immensely powerful and intelligent being in its own right. BACK TO THE SOURCE 149 But then comes the even greater panic of seeing the bottom fall straight out of his life; of realizing how completely alien this new reality is to everything he has always known; of recognizing what an utter catastrophe lies ahead if he can't find some way to come to grips with this craziness which, "once again', is staring him straight in the face. In a sense he already gave the whole game away as soon as he chose to specify that Philemon has an "Egyptian -- Gnostic -- Hellenistic" background -- because anyone familiar with those quintessentially Egyptian -- Gnostic -- Hellenistic texts known to us today as the Hermetica wouldn't only be unfazed by Jung's accounts of his panic and terror, but would expect them. These are simply the standard stages that have to be passed through in the process of discovering one's inner teacher. Of course, though, Jung's secretary could hardly be supposed to have much interest in such historical curiosities. Her loyalty was strictly to him, not to what might or might not lie behind him. And that kind of sheer terror he describes would need a good deal of softening, massaging, toning down, because certain- ly it wouldn't be right in any way to create a bad impression of the man or his psychology. As for managing, in the process, to obliterate any real continuity with those very same Gnostic traditions Jung was pointing to: that would be a trivial price to pay.*' And then there is the other point that jumps right out from the original record of what he, himself, said -- which has to do with the question of Philemon's identity. In fact, far from making do with ambiguous comments about Gnostic colorations, Jung states point-blank and repeatedly: Philemon was a Gnostic. Again, though, this straightforward identification of Jung's own teacher as a Gnostic was embarrassing enough either a century ago or half a century ago to justify simply leaving it out. 150 PART TWO After all, he was walking on the thinnest ice by engaging even professionally with the topic of Gnosticism. Naturally one at least had to make the effort to maximize his distance from it, however small or large the cost.*® But, now, it wouldn't be so wise to think too much has changed -- because this same attitude of needing, unconsciously even more than consciously, to keep him at arm's length from the Gnostics is still alive and well. In the brand-new literature on the Red book there is already no end of commentaries explaining how Professor Jung saw it as his essential task to separate himself from Philemon: to bring about a "critical disidentification" between himself and this fantasy figure. His first and last obligation was to stand apart as the independent, rational, detached scientific observer engaged in his thought-experiments; his controlled, dispassionate exercises in ventriloquism." And it's purely a question of whether we choose to believe these explanations -- or pay attention to Jung himself. The picture that he painted of Philemon for his Red book, of his teacher with the kingfisher's wings, is already well-known enough from being splashed almost everywhere across books and magazines. But he also painted a very similar mural, upstairs at his own private retreat in Bollingen. At the top of both paintings he formally addresses Philemon, in ancient Greek script, as "Father". And on the mural he has added, in the original Latin, an alchemical saying under Philemon's left wing. It's a beautiful text, known as a quotation from Hermes Trismegistus, that starts with the words Protege me protegam te: "Protect me -- I will protect you." It continues with the statement "I give birth to the light even though my nature is darkness." Then, though, it suddenly comes to an end with its climactic announcement. "Therefore nothing better, nothing more worthy BACK TO THE SOURCE 151 of veneration, can come to pass in this world than the conjunction of myself and my son."°° That Jung addresses Philemon in both paintings as "Father" couldn't possibly be less surprising: repeatedly, inside the Red book and even during private discussions about the Red book with people he felt able to trust, he refers to his teacher as "Father" and has Philemon refer to Jung in turn as "son". This, ever so simply, is how he defined the relationship between the two of them; or, even more simply, it's how the relationship between them defined itself. So nothing could be more significant than the fact that he has added, on the wall of his very private retreat, a Hermetic text which culminates in dramatically celebrating the conjoining -- the alchemical conjunction -- of father and son. One would have to be rather blind or a little crazy not to see that there's no disidentifying from Philemon without the even more critical conjoining: that the whole point and purpose of any differentiation is to prepare the ground for the union. That, after all, is what the Mysterium coniunctionis which Jung considered the summation of his whole life's work is about -- the separation followed by synthesis, fission followed by the fusion.** Probably this will sound very nice, at least in theory. But if we care to watch how the fusion of teacher and student actually manifests in practice, we just have to turn from Jung at his most private to Jung at his most public. A couple of years before he died he gave his most famous interview ever, to the BBC. And the single most famous point inside that interview arrives when, asked if he believes in God, he answers: "J know. 1 don't need to believe. I know." Only fifty years later did it become clear that these words weren't really his at all. They were words that had been spoken to him by Philemon, his own teacher, another half-century before the interview ever took place. 152 PART TWO What Philemon said to him silently, he spoke out loud. And now there is not the slightest room left for doubting what should never have been open to doubt in the first place -- which is that whenever Jung insisted he was only interested in knowledge and not in beliefs, as he so often did, he wasn't really speaking as a typical modern scientist antagonistic to religious creeds or beliefs. At heart he was speaking as a Gnostic whose one concern is with the knowledge, the absolutely terrifying knowledge, hidden away not only inside the root of every science but deep in the core of each religion." And at the same time, through pointing away from all the accumulated beliefs and dogmas of religions to that inner Gnostic knowledge, the Gnostic father and son were conjoined as one. It can be quite a revealing experience to spend time in Jung's private library reading through the books about ancient Greek mystery traditions which he bought, and studied minutely, a century ago. Everything inside him springs to life as soon as he comes across any passages that touch on the initiatory process of discovering -- or being discovered by -- one's true father. He underscores the printed words, adds lines or comments in the margin, inserts bookmarks when he stumbles on refer- ences to ancient Gnostic or Hermetic or magical texts which have been structured as dialogues between mystical father and mystical son; or to the esoteric practice, which reaches back to the Pythagoreans, of teachers adopting students as their own child; or to this adoption as an initiation into the mysteries of rebirth; or to such an adoption and initiation by the "spiritual father" as the most perfect merging, the sacred union, of father and son. And there is one particular passage that he carefully has noted by leaving a clear mark in the margin. He has been reading BACK TO THE SOURCE 153 the most Gnostic of the dialogues contained in the collection of sacred Hermetic texts known as the Hermetica, which again is not such a surprising choice when one considers how the Red book shows Philemon storing away his own sacred Hermetic texts inside a cupboard. The dialogue is presented as an archetypal discussion between spiritual father and spiritual son. And at a certain point -- after all the dramatic upheaval of the son suddenly realizing the horrific impossibilities he is confronted with and bravely stating how alienated he has become from everything once familiar to him and bitterly complaining about just how terrified he is of going crazy -- the mood starts to change because it's time to move at last to the climax, to the mystery of rebirth. Now Father, as the passage marked by Jung begins, "I see myself to be the All. I am in heaven and in earth, in water and in air; | am in beasts and plants; I am a babe in the womb, and one that is not yet conceived, and one that has been born; I am present everywhere." And as the Father replies: now you know what rebirth is. Of course, for Jung, the one place that gave him unique ac- cess to the experience of rebirth was Bollingen -- the place he had ritually dedicated as sacred to Philemon. And it's no coincidence that in his memoirs, right after describing this experience of rebirth there and just after mentioning Philemon by name, he goes straight on to say how easily he finds himself slipping into the state of feeling he is everywhere and present in everything; spread out across the whole landscape, in the water and in the clouds; alive in every animal and tree.>? It's not that he is copying or imitating anything. When you have the experience, you don't need to because you know. That's the whole point of the son being united with the Father. In that union of the outside and inside, of the Gnostic or Hermetic readings and the Gnostic or Hermetic teacher, it's not 154 PART TWO a question of what one reads causing the experience -- or even the other way around -- but a question of something no longer remembered in the West. It simply is a matter, as Jung would later apply himself in his scientific guise to trying to explain, of allowing them to exist together; independent but dependent; synchronous, simultaneous, side by side. Philemon can take us straight to the heart of the truth about Carl Jung. And he is also able to take us, if we are strong enough to go there, right to the heart of the lie. After all, any truth that doesn't stretch as far as to embrace the untruth is hardly a truth one could call complete. The only trouble is that, to get there, we are going to have to leave every leathered hypocrisy and imaginary honesty behind. When Jung was at the point of turning eighty, he sent a note to an American woman about the being who had been his teacher. Early on, he wrote, it introduced itself as Philemon. And so, perfectly in line with ancient tradition, Jung was left to shoulder the task of understanding his teacher's name: what it really meant, what it meant for him. The obvious step was to trace it back to the fictional char- acter of Philemon who, together with his wife Baucis, features in Goethe's famous Faust. But naturally that raises the question of how Goethe himself had come by the name -- and the only available answer is the abrupt reply he once gave a friend who asked him what his characters had to do with the Philemon and Baucis already well known in the ancient world. 156 PART TWO Absolutely nothing!, Goethe snapped. 'They don't have any- thing to do with anything; I simply used the names to create "a good effect". And, to be sure, this was a stunningly dismissive thing for him to say. But it was nowhere near as striking as Jung's own explanation of it: "a typical Goethean answer to Eckermann! trying to conceal his vestiges". Here, in plunging into the mystery of Philemon and his wife which he once said he would give the entire world to be able to solve, Jung is adding his own comments -- not Goethe's. With his reference to vestiges and concealment he is offering a faithful portrayal not just of someone else's situation, but of his own." And in case his statement needs any clarifying, I will explain it step by step. Philemon's greatest gift to his adopted son was the direct knowledge or realization that everything we experience is not only alive, but real. Even all the thoughts that we unquestioningly think we have -- they are independent realities like birds in the trees or animals running wild. Each idea or fantasy that comes to us isn't something we have imagined, fabricated, created: it's a living entity in its own right. Just as Parmenides had said, everything you can perceive or even think about exists simply because it exists for you to perceive or think about. This is the basis of the underworld logic Parmenides had been told, two and a half thousand years earlier, to bring back to his fellow humans by the queen of the dead. And this -- as Jung himself would describe it after his own arduous descent into the so-called world of the dead where of course, unlike here in the world of the living, every single thing is still alive -- is the gift of psychological objectivity. It's the gift of knowing without a shade of doubt that the psyche is real because it was a gift which had been handed to him, person BACK TO THE SOURCE 157 to person, by the fantasy world itself; by his inner father and teacher. But when he came to face the next challenge of handing on this gift to the world of humans, he realized he would never get very far if he offered it as something given to him by an imaginary being. So he presented it, instead, in a language that was bound to reassure and impress: the language of science. This is how the groundwork came to be laid for his entire psychology; is the ultimate origin of techniques such as active imagination which trainees around the world would soon be busy copying, imitating, learning. And, at the same time, this predict- able process of focusing on the gift while leaving the Gnostic giver in the shadows didn't just mark the stage of translating his experiences into a respectable scholarly idiom -- or whatever high-sounding language we choose to use. It also marked the start of Jung doing ever so precisely what he assumed Goethe was doing: hiding away the truth about Philemon through concealing his vestiges. The funny thing is, though, that even the process of hiding or concealing always ends up taking on a life of its own. And there is more than a touch of humour about the situation Jung suddenly found himself in when, years later, he decided to fight back against Martin Buber's very public accusations that he was a Gnostic. Buber, he complained, doesn't have the slightest right to accuse me of being a Gnostic because he doesn't have a clue about "the reality of the psyche', is abysmally ignorant about my crucial discovery that there is an "objective psyche", has no understanding at all about the complete independence and autonomy of every thought or entity inside it. In other words, to prove to the public that he's not a Gnostic he appeals to the identical discoveries which were given to him as gifts by his Gnostic teacher." 158 PART TWO The paradox could hardly be more perfect, or complete. It's almost as if for a brief moment the whole forty years of fuss and drama spent claiming to be a faultless empiricist, the most impeccable scientist, blows away like spray to expose what was meant to stay unseen. After all: no one was supposed to notice or know that the core principles he appeals to as showing how free his work is of any Gnostic taint had, each one of them, been revealed to him by a Gnostic. But the paradoxical absurdity in this hidden irony offers just a taste of the other absurdities to come -- because, as Jung already implies with his very knowing comment on Goethe's reply to Eckermann, concealing one's vestiges is never only a matter of concealing. It's also a matter of pretending and denying; misdirecting and misleading; deceiving, simply lying. And the reality is that this is exactly what Jung does best. He pretends beautifully, lies magnificently, all for the sake of concealing as much as possible the vestiges of his unrepentant inner afhliation with Gnosticism. For instance there is the famous case of his Seven sermons to the dead, a mysteriously Gnostic text he had been circulating over the years among friends and colleagues as a quintessential extract from his work on the Red book. But as soon as Martin Buber dared to mention it in public, all hell broke loose. Instantly Jung swelled to the sublimest heights of self-righteousness -- waving the Seven sermons away as nothing but a naively artful little poem he once had thrown together, long ago, during the briefest flurry of enthusiasm about some Gnostic writings he just so happened to stumble on way back at that distant point in time. The unspoken truth, though, is that in private he had been keeping up his passionate readings and studies of Gnostic BACK TO THE SOURCE 159 literature until the moment of Buber's attack. And even more important is the fact that secretly Jung always viewed these same Seven sermons as something altogether wonderful, embodying a wisdom "so much superior to my dull conscious mind"; as a very special gift to him from the unconscious, a unique source of light and hope, the ripest of fruits dropped into his lap; as the formal beginning of everything that would really matter to him, because through it he managed to express themes which would remain of the gravest importance to him for the rest of his work and the rest of his life. Of course this is all a little awkward, not to mention stressful, for commentators to handle. Ever so nervously and politely -- because it wouldn't do to offend anyone living or dead -- they point out with the greatest of discretion that, here as well as elsewhere, he was not being altogether "candid" in his public statements or denials. But just perhaps, faced with Jung's acknowledged and per- fectly obvious lack of candour, a little more candour is called for from us. And that's not even to mention those cases where what he says and does is so shockingly shameless that, to be quite honest, it's almost as if no one can bear to look.*® He would do anything to cover his Gnostic tracks -- not just fake or hide but commit what by any of our normal if hypocriti- cal moral standards would be condemned as religious hypocrisy, intellectual fraud. And it doesn't help at all to turn a blind eye. Even so, to keep watching certainly isn't easy. Everything solid might seem as if it's being swept away. Any recognizable sense of ethics or integrity or consistency could feel as if it's being turned back to front and upside down. Jung himself, the brave man of science and wisdom, could appear to have sunk to become nothing more than the moral coward he once admitted he was. 160 PART TWO But, in reality, everything is exactly where it should be. In fact we only have to listen for just a moment to his characteristic fury in denouncing his "medieval-minded critics" for daring to denounce him "as a mystic and Gnostic' -- and immediately we are back on familiar ground. Here we are, on firm land once more, with Jung's own dual view of the human psyche: a view inspired in no small part by the ancient philosophy of Empedocles. It's the old song-and-dance routine all over again of his two contradictory and conflicting personalities eternally at each other's throats, constantly struggling for the last word.' This time around, though, we don't just have Jung the mystic loudly insisting he is not a mystic. We also have Jung the Gnostic shouting out even louder, as his no. 1 personality, that he's not the Gnostic he is as personality no. 2. And there we have the definitive picture, able to satisfy everybody and nobody. Jung is a Gnostic but not a Gnostic -- all in one. To us, now, this talk of Jung as both a Gnostic and not a Gnostic is utter nonsense -- and our heads simply spin. But that makes it all the more interesting to note how, once, nothing would have been easier or more natural for people to understand. Trace Jung's own, very conscious alliance with Hermetic tradition back to its roots in the god Hermes and you will find even divinities proudly contradicting themselves by announcing the precise opposite of what everyone knows to be the case. Then there are the Popes who used to offer their full endorsement for the practice of stating, outwardly, the perfect contrary of the mysterious reality one knows inside.*® Today, though, this kind of deviousness is only appropriate for criminals and murderers. Each of us is so completely identified with our processed little truths that we don't even know what's happening just one level lower down in our own psyche. And our scholars -- ultimate embodiments for Jung of personality no. 1, the most eloquent of spokespeople for the spirit of our time which pats itself on the back for its cleverness at getting rid of wisdom, mass murderers of everything profoundly real -- destroy any slightest possibility of following him down into the depths of ourselves. After all, our personality no. 1 isn't only interested in trivia or sport. It loves dabbling in whatever obscure subject it fancies 162 PART TWO misunderstanding; becomes a learned specialist in the world of personality no. 2, a leading expert on Jung and Gnostics and alchemy. This is why academics are so happy parroting Jung's own no. 1 personality every time he insists he's no Gnostic, because nothing can be more seductive than hearing the sound of our own superficiality bounced right back at us." But nothing, for Jung, is simple until one accepts that for him nothing is simple. And simply to listen to the voice of his personality no. 1 is a recipe for utter disaster because Jung's attitude to the Gnostics isn't just what it seems. At the same time it's also Jung's attitude to Jung. For example the defining characteristic, to him, of the no. 2 personality is quiet certainty: a certainty rooted in the experience of eternity. Aside from its fondness for lies the main characteristic of personality no. 1 -- fleeting creature of the moment, rooted in nothing outside itself -- is its flipping and flopping, inconsistencies and uncertainties, the inner experience of being endlessly wracked with hesitations and doubts. And we have to hold them both together if we want to appreciate why Jung sounds so undecided whenever he talks out about the Gnostics. He praises them for being so skilful at avoiding inflation only to accuse them of inflation, absolutely insists it's "clear beyond a doubt" that they were psychologists only to doubt that they were psychologists, accuses them of being primitive and childish only to admire them for being so sophisticated as well as two thousand years ahead of their time, denounces them for being metaphysicians only to admit that he isn't sure. Of course the predictable reaction when confronted with these constant paradoxes, these blatant contradictions, is to try smoothing them over; is to do everything possible as a Jungian or Jung scholar to blunt the sharpness of their edges by fabricating some impossibly consistent account of his attitude to the Gnostics. BACK TO THE SOURCE 163 But this is completely to miss the point in every conceivable way. First of all it's to overlook the fact that when Jung defines the basic method of communication adopted by ancient Gnos- tics, he states that they very deliberately spoke in paradoxes and used constant contradictions. In other words: even through the simple act of writing about the Gnostics just as he did, he was demonstrating to anyone with eyes and ears that he was a Gnostic. And then there is the other point -- infinitely harder to swallow. People love asking the question of what, exactly, Jung's attitude to the Gnostics happened to be. The only real answer, though, is to ask: Which of his two personalities are you asking about? Just to ask that question spells death to every sentimental idea anyone might have about the man -- and this reaches far deeper than the issue of his relationship to the Gnostics because it's a question even those closest to him were, very naturally, unable or unwilling to face. In their lives as well as their writings they all created a benignly idealized image of him; found ways of relating to him day after day on a human level by smoothly blending his two personalities into one; hung on the master's every word unless he said something in an obvious moment of anger or it simply suited them not to. But, as always, Jung was right in insisting that real wisdom or understanding only comes from the most unexpected and unappreciated source -- because it was his English translator, frowned on as a mere intellectual and rejected as an outsider by most of Jung's inner circle, who stood alone in realizing how absolutely critical it was at any given moment to know if he was speaking from personality no. 1 or no. 2. 164 PART TWO This, he explained, is what it means to face up to the shift- ing fullness of Jung's reality "with his 'two personalities' who invariably contradict each other" and who can switch places in the blink of an eye." Strip away the veils of familiarity and nothing can be taken for granted any more. We have to keep our wits constantly about us because there is always danger lurking under the surface of such a person's words. And in just the same spirit, not many people who read or study Jung would ever want to take the idea of him concealing his vestiges seriously because its implications are so terrifying. It means we can never be sure if he means what he is saying or is saying what he is saying only to cover what he means. We can't even be certain who, or what, he is. But the most crucial point of all is that, with these two personalities, there is no question of right versus wrong, It's not that one of the two can be conveniently disregarded and only the other, the truth-teller, believed. They both have to be listened to, ever so carefully, because they both have their own place: both have their role to play in the larger scheme of things. The essential truth of Jung's Gnostic teacher Philemon belonged inside the sacred shrine he had made for him at Bollingen -- which, uncoincidentally, happened to be the one place where Jung felt free to live from the depths of his personality no. 2. But the whole point of having a shrine is to contain the sacred, to protect it against contamination and profanation, keep it safe. And his cocky no. 1 personality with all its superficialities and deceptions and misdirections, its denials and lies, played an utterly indispensable part in misleading people; fooling and distracting the curious; keeping them well away. This is why he hated talking in public about his relationship to the Gnostics, and is why the people who were near him BACK TO THE SOURCE 165 amplified his fears even more. It's why he held his Gnostic "secrets" such as the Seven sermons so tight and close to his chest, which in turn explains the strength of his anger at Buber for trying to expose them. Perhaps to talk about Jung and secrets might sound strange. But there is no reason at all why it should, because that comment of his about Goethe and vestiges is far from being the only place where he very plainly lays out the case for having to cover one's tracks; hide one's traces. In fact elsewhere he couldn't be clearer about the urgent psychological need, whenever touching on issues that matter most, to hide one's experiences by appearing to talk about things and people quite different from what one is really talking about -- just as I am doing in this book." In the overall scheme of things everything has its place, even the deceptions and illusions. This is exactly what Empedocles was aiming to communicate with his teaching about the dual spirits behind the whole of existence: one of them a spirit of cheerful illusion, the other a spirit far too powerful for humans to bear. It's precisely why Parmenides, to the endless frustration and confusion of later thinkers, presented his own underworld teaching as having two halves. One contains the goddess' revelation of the truth, but in her otherworldly wisdom she doesn't stop there. Instead she goes straight on to demonstrate how, alone, even the most perfect truth can never be complete by dedicating the second half of her teaching to deceptions and illusions; untruths and lies. And it's well worth noting that Parmenides' cutting-edge contributions to the science of his time are all included in the second half of his poem, not the first. This is the way things used to be done in an age when the arts of trickery were still appreciated: still understood. This also is why, again perfectly in line with ancient tradition, Jung states near the start of his Red book that the spirit of the 166 PART TWO depths is by itself as inadequate as the superficial spirit of our time -- because it's only the ability to maintain a balance between the two, even at the cost of contradicting oneself, that ultimately matters. Then he goes straight into talking the strange language, so familiar already to Empedocles but so utterly alien to us, of not one but two madnesses. One is the delusion of a human identifying completely with the wisdom spoken by the spirit of the depths; the other is the equal delusion of identifying unquestioningly with the spirit of our time to the point of seeing, just like almost everybody else, nothing but the surface of things. And one wonders how easy it would be nowadays to discover a single person who has experienced, through and through, the harrowing reality of what that truly means. Recognizing the insanity of the unfortunate few who have been overwhelmed by their own unconscious is easy enough. Recognizing the collective madness of the many who are blindly and mindlessly led along by "the general spirit in which we think and act today" is, to say the least, a little rarer. All of a sudden, we are being drawn back to that Gnostic vision of the Christ as a figure entering our world specifically "in order to illuminate the stupidity, darkness, and unconsciousness of mankind"; or to the insight of Jung himself when, just before he died, he stood amazed at how naive he had been "in not expecting the darkness to be so dense". But there are some things that it's wiser by far not to mention out loud -- and it's best simply to forget I ever said that. In spite of his immense importance for Carl Jung, there is just one single scene where Philemon makes a physical appearance inside the main body of the Red Jook. And that's not the only exceptional thing about this partic- ular scene. The Red book is a seedbed bursting with significance for the rest of Jung's work. Whatever he would later discover or write about famously had its roots there, would flower from there. But the fate of this one scene is unbroken silence. From it nothing visible flowers at all; and the central theme that emerges out of his encounter here with Philemon, Christ's friend, will never come to the surface even once in any other of his published writings." It could be quite tempting to assume that this is because Jung found nothing of any value in what happened between him and his teacher: nothing worth bringing into the collective world of personality no. 1. But for anyone at all familiar with how he really functioned, the alternative possibility is bound to spring to mind -- which is that something here might have needed shielding from the spirit of our time, something much too fragile and precious to be made public. And, as a matter of fact, soon we'll see the kind of unnatural disasters that instantly unfold from the very first moment even 168 PART TWO the most seasoned of Jungians lay eyes on this scene inside the freshly printed Red book. There is also something else about the scene which is extremely odd. In it, Jung describes Philemon as "the magician". He goes searching for him because he realizes he, himself, is completely stuck and understands that -- before he can take a single step forward into life -- he is going to have to learn the secret of magic. And eventually he finds Philemon, tending his tulips, at the little cottage he shares with his wife Baucis out in the countryside. But what's so odd about all this is that, as Jung knew very well, the cottage didnt even exist. Ever since he was a teenager he had learned to live and breathe each scene of Goethe's Faust as if it was his own reality. Every single incident inside the drama happened to him; and one particular event affected him more deeply, shook him more personally, than any other. It might come as something of a surprise to hear that in the second half of Goethe's play the character called Faust already appears -- two hundred years ago -- as the archetypal property developer. But nothing in this world is truly quite as new as we think it is. Already for Goethe, then for Jung, land development was the sign of the times: epitomized the great tide of so-called progress rising everywhere, sweeping away everything in its path, impossible to resist or even escape. And because Faust felt he needed that little patch of land both Philemon and Baucis lived on, because he had the devil on his side, the humble old couple ended up being murdered and their cottage burned to the ground." In short, it could never be a question of Jung trying to con- vey the secret of his encounter with Philemon to our collective modern world because the encounter never had any place inside that world to begin with -- had been obliterated, dramatically cut out of it, right from the start. BACK TO THE SOURCE 169 Instead, their magical meeting quietly took place in an alternate reality altogether unrelated to the spirit of our time. And meanwhile, up on the surface of himself, Jung dutifully went through the appropriate motions of insisting that of course it would be the absurdest thing in the world to suspect him of being an occultist or having anything at all to do with magic." The surface is only the surface, though. And he always found it difficult to keep entirely hidden what was bubbling underneath. For instance it's still easy to pick up on his excitement, as a young man in his thirties, bursting to tell Freud how he had found a perfect motto to encapsulate the message and purpose of the new psychoanalytic movement -- a quotation he had discovered in the ancient Greek magical writings he was studying at the time. Or to be more precise, the saying he had chosen came straight from the so-called Paris magical papyrus: a text which just so happens to preserve, more faithfully than any other document in existence, many of the most mysterious traditions surrounding that famous ancient magician called Empedocles. But I wouldn't like to give the wrong impression that all Jung had done was to find, in this one magical saying, an ideal motto to define the emerging science of psychoanalysis. On the contrary, he also took it to heart as his own guide in the inexpressibly laborious process of starting to note down every single image or thought that came into his head -- a process that led him straight into creating the Black books which, in turn, directly laid the groundwork for the Red book out of which the rest of his work would flow.° And as Jung grew older, the magic didn't go further underground or just vanish. Instead it became far more apparent, although even more enigmatic. Central to his whole work is the process of individuation; and central to the process of individuation is the unavoidable 170 PART TWO need for anyone or everyone to encounter at a certain stage, then integrate, the reality contained in the archetype of the magician. Like so much of what he tried to convey, this theme of encounter plus integration has been a cause of no small discomfort. There are more than just a handful of people who are only too eager to explain it as purely a matter of learning to disidentify from the primitive archetype of the magician and leave all that nonsense about magic far behind. As usual, though, that's not quite what Jung himself had in mind. For him the first option, when confronted with this primordial power of magic, is to identify with it unthinkingly and in effect end up as the modern bourgeois version of what would once have been called a black magician. The second is to become so scared of the magical power that one projects it as far away as possible into the safety of the heavens and turns into a grovelling, helpless little worm overshadowed by the omnipotent figure of God. But the third way -- according to Jung the correct way, what could well be called the only truly magical way of approaching magic -- is to "assimilate" all the hidden contents of the magician archetype quite consciously inside oneself. And that could sound respectable, even scientific, enough if it didn't at the same time evoke with such uncanny precision the ancient mythical legends about gods swallowing magical divinities so they can absorb and incorporate their mysterious powers." For myself, I am going to steer well clear of any learned or scholarly discussion about the practicalities of swallowing and assimilating such a quintessential archetype of magic. After all, Jung knows what he is saying when he tells Philemon in the Red book that there are no professors left who know even the slightest thing about magic any more. But it may be worth ever so quickly mentioning how there had already, by the time Jung was alive, been a lengthy tradition BACK TO THE SOURCE 171 in the West of doctors as well as philosophers claiming that real magic only begins when one has left the whole external business of spells and rituals and ceremonies behind. In other words, it's not so much a matter of doing magic as of simply being the magic instead. And we just so happen to meet with a strikingly similar picture of the magician who has left his magical doings behind in the Red book -- right at the start of the scene where Jung manages to catch up with Philemon outside his cottage only to find what he jokingly, but also respectfully, refers to as an "old magician" who seems to have retired now from the business of magic and might at the very most just do an odd spell for someone now or then. Naturally that's not all, though. With characters like Phile- mon, or Jung, it never is. Almost as if deliberately to give the lie to the convenient image of Professor Jung as someone who left all his childish dabbling in the occult behind as he got older, and wiser, we also happen to have the reports of those who spent time alone with him during his final months -- and would describe him, very specifically, as the "old magician". And that's not even to mention the people who, after being allowed to visit him towards the end of his life, would come away with the unshakeable impression that they had not just been with an expert psychologist or scientist or scholar. They had been in the overwhelming presence of a living Gnostic; a living alchemist. But, as a true son of his father, the parallels between the two of them hardly stopped there. Sometimes, just like Philemon, Jung too might find himself doing the odd spell for somebody now or then. And, almost as if purposely to frustrate anyone who would like to insist all these descriptions of him were only loose or humorous metaphors, we 172 PART TWO still have clear evidence of him performing traditional magic by following the exact procedures of ancient magical ritual right to the letter." Of course, here again, I am not speaking as I should. Everybody with even the slightest investment in defending Jung's reputation will be as appalled at the reality of Jung the magician as they are certain to be horrified at the prospect of Jung, saviour of the world. Even so, the evidence can only be pushed away so far and people can only be fooled for so long. And, besides, the truth is that the world needs just a bit of saving -- not from anybody else, but from ourselves. It also needs a little magic, too, which is exactly why Jung sets out at the start of that exceptional scene in the Red book to find someone who will answer for him the central question of how magic is taught; how it can be learned. When he finally meets up with the old magician himself, Philemon could hardly be more difficult or evasive -- a grinding reminder of all the hardships and frustrations, humiliations and confusions, any would-be student would typically have been forced to submit to in the ancient world. And it's not that he hadn't been warned. Jung's own soul had already prepared him by predicting in the plainest possible terms that there was one thing he would have to sacrifice, and sacrifice completely, before he could even begin to learn magic. That's the sacrifice of the slightest human desire for comfort; of any longing or craving for solace. The words almost burn through the page as his soul! keeps telling him, time and time again, about the darkly unconsolable future that lies ahead of him. Jung, for his part, never speaks again with more honesty or burning intensity than when he realizes what the gift of primordial magic actually is -- what the BACK TO THE SOURCE 173 proverbial magic wand is that he abruptly finds himself holding in his hand. It's a black rod as crushingly heavy as iron and as comfort- lessly cold as death: something of such piercingly terrible power it will tear his heart to pieces, nearly shatter his nerves. And here, twisted and turned around Philemon's finger, he begins to experience what that means. But at last, in this never-to-be-continued debate between student of magic and magical teacher, Philemon carefully allows the odd statements to slip out -- statements which just so happen to define all that remains of Jung's published work far better than anyone might care to admit. He explains, without explaining anything, that even to come within sniffing distance of real magic needs tremendous cunning because it can't be taught or learned; can't be known, certainly can't be understood; keeps silent and demands, ahead of anything else, the total unlearning of reason. As Jung himself comments after leaving, even the meeting that he just had with Philemon is magical and is thoroughly impossible to understand. Then he goes on to add one crucial statement of his own: there can be no thinking about magic because "the practice of magic consists of making what is not understood understandable in a way and a manner which is not understandable."" Now, if this whole episode in the Red book was respectfully left alone as it should, a certain balance could be preserved and things wouldn't be so bad. The problem is that it's not. In fact I have heard some of the most highly respected Jungian therapists lecturing not only about the Red book -- but about this section in particular. And this is how they sum it up: Magic, according to Carl Jung, is very easy to understand because it's just a way of dealing with the irrational. It's as simple as that, nothing more. It's nothing grand or special. 174 PART TWO There is no great power, no magical wand or rod you can hold in your hand or anything like that. Magic is purely a matter of comfort; is nothing but a question of learning how to feel comfortable with the irrational, how to make it fully intelligible and understandable. That, if you want to know, is all that magic really is. And if you don't see what's wrong with this -- or, even worse, can't see anything wrong with it at all -- perhaps I can humbly suggest that you should go back and start reading this book again from the first page. That's what happens when anyone forgets Jung's constant warning never to explain anything away as "only" this or "nothing but" that. It's exactly what happens from the very first moment we ignore his nightmarish implication that, whenever we imagine we understand something he says, this is because we are unaware of the magical power he is using to manufacture such an illusory understanding. Here is what happens when we have no real interest in the magic itself, let alone in paying the crushing price to be paid for learning it, but are only interested in shaping it into a tool to protect us from what it was meant to be. Above all, it's what happens when our desperate need for personal or professional comfort is so overwhelmingly strong it forces us to run far away from the depths as fast as our expert legs will take us: to put as much space as we possibly can between ourselves and the bewildering fact that "the thing that causes the greatest fear is the source of the greatest wisdom". This is precisely why Jung realized that his own work was destined, just the same as Christ's, to become institutional- ized -- and, just like early Christianity, lose any of its real fire or spirit in a few short years. The high priests can never be stopped once they start to come. BACK TO THE SOURCE 175 As you can see, it would be superfluous for Jung's enemies or critics to try to destroy his work because those who speak and write in his name do a fine enough job on their own." This is how subtly, silently, invisibly the situation changes: is how easily, how surreptitiously, the intensity of direct experience slips and then slides unnoticed into something else. All of a sudden our no. 1 personality, with its cocksure ways of masquerading as master of the depths, has successfully invaded the domain of personality no. 2. And this, it can be ever so important to understand, is its own magic. It's the very substance that our collective world is made of, a magic in reverse. It's a thing of the most amazing strangeness and gruesome beauty to watch -- the perverted form of magic known as rationality. For the rational part of us everything is reasonable and, even when we talk about magic, we are proving there is no such thing. But, for the magician, everything in existence is magic. Even trying to get rid of magic is among the most potent forms of magic: the magic of our age. Here with our own inverted kind of magic, not anywhere else, is where we can start to discover for ourselves a bit about the power of magic. The real magic itself can never be learned, is impossible to teach or be trained in, because whatever we might glimpse of it would immediately get swallowed up by this magic we live and breathe in -- the magic of our time. This is the reasonable, progressive magic that invisibly destroys; the magic of a whole culture ripping itself up by its roots; of each of us celebrating new ways, just like the miniature Lucifers we are, of silently murdering our elders. And if that sounds harsh, it's because none of us can claim to be miraculously exempt from the spirit of our time. We are all, without exception, being compromised and eaten away at every 176 PART TWO moment by the insatiably devouring appetite of "the spirit that runs through the masses". Jungians or non-Jungians makes no difference. As Jung himself used to observe, those who go by the name of "Jungian" might like to think they are a little special but they are not. And there is no difference whatsoever between waving a magic wand now to get rid of Jung the magician and the centuries after centuries of industrious scholarship which, with impeccably irrational rationality, waved its own wand to get rid of Empedocles the magician; dispose of Parmenides the magician; obliterate any true trace of the primordial magic at the roots and source of our western world. ToapproachJung's magic is impossible without understanding that ancient magic, or what happened to it. I am not just referring to the irritating rituals or objectionable spells, but to the far deeper magic of how to create a whole culture -- how to bring a new civilization into being. For his part, he knew only too well why this magic had to be cut away completely from our modern world. As he explains in the Red book, "our time no longer needs magic" because now is the time of reason." And that's why the only future for Philemon's magic lies either in silence -- or, with the inevitable circlings of time, in the even more silent destruction of what once destroyed it. For anyone to suggest that the person who created perhaps the most liberating, most transformative psychology in the modern world devoted his life to penitence and repentance: this would hardly sound very reasonable. But that's just what Carl Jung did. And its oddness is a strong hint at how many thousands of years we already have drifted away from him in the space of less than a century, just as it's a clear sign of how quickly we are sliding away from ourselves. To be sure, he was never too open about what mattered most to him -- as if that really made much difference. In fact he could be as direct and honest as he wanted and still, magician that he was, no one would quite register what he was saying. Even so, he best felt able to be himself by himself at his private retreat in Bollingen; and, as if this wasn't secretive enough, carved a special text into the wall of the tower which he referred to as his "hidden inscription". Four words long, it summarized for him the whole purpose of Bollingen while at the same time telling a hidden story: Philemonis sacrum Fausti poenitentia, "Phi- lemon's shrine -- Faust's repentance"." The first two words are straightforward enough. He had built the tower at Bollingen as a sacred place for his inner teacher. But the second are the riddle. 178 PART TWO Ever since he read Goethe's Faust for the first time as a boy, Jung had come face to face with himself in the character of Faust; identified with him completely; felt as guilty, when Faust accidentally had Philemon and Baucis killed, as if he somehow had helped in the past to have them murdered; saw it as his personal responsibility to atone for the crime, or at least prevent it happening again, by confronting the Faust inside himself. And the only way to understand this situation, humanly, is if we are willing to relate it to ourselves. Faust is the classic example of a property developer who gets greedy, behaves badly, evicts some peace-loving people, even causes a death or two. And then what do we do? Most likely we sigh and do nothing, perhaps talk a bit about it with all the correct intonations of self-righteous superiority while inside our- selves accepting it as the terrible price to be paid for the blessings of living in such a convenient modern world. There again, we might want to take legal action if we have the ways and means. Or more probably, in line with the energetic spirit of our age, we'll join up with the ranks of other activists to create innovative new ways of coming together to make the world a better place for everyone to live in. But Jung repented. To him all those outer solutions are the childish result of me believing I am a noble force of right and good while heroically projecting the violence of the problem somewhere else, anywhere else, as long as it's outside myself. This is why he backed out of cooperating with the United Nations in their grand plans for world peace -- because he saw the arrogance and utter futility of rushing out to correct the world's wrongs in the firm belief that my own attitude is right and true. "It's a very long step from this conviction to the conclusion: the world is wrong and therefore I am wrong too." BACK TO THE SOURCE 179 And, as he immediately added: "To pronounce such words is easy, but to feel their truth in the marrow of one's bones is a very different proposition". There, in the marrow of one's bones, is where things become serious; deadly serious. Here is where one has to choose whether to go out into the world or go in -- all the way, not just dipping one's toes as spiritually or psychologically minded people like to do -- into the depths of oneself. This is why Jung insisted "one virtually has to die" before being able to grasp the full reality of Faust's crime against Philemon or Baucis. But it's also the reason why, right at the core of his Red book during the stage of his Christ-like descent into hell, he sees that nothing whatsoever can be done on any human or spiritual level until each one of us recognizes our own perfect "complicity in the act of evil"." There is no forging such a recognition. None of the usual masks or masquerading will do -- because whoever comes back with a direct awareness of that complicity has the haunting look, the unmistakable glance, of someone whose eyes have seen straight through hell into eternity. And so we come to the part of this story about what that evil is. It's much the same story as before: Jung expressing himself ever so simply, ever so clearly, except that we don't notice because we are not allowed to. That's how powerful the magic is of this world we live in. Plastered across his published biography is the plainest possible statement that this isn't the evil of some unscrupulous developer or businessman, as we would like to believe, but the evil in us all. And that's the ruthless search for improvement -- for the newest, the newer, the new. It's the gnawing sense of discontent and dissatisfaction that pushes us faster and faster into a non-existent future, the diabolical addiction to speed that robs us of our time and strips 180 PART TWO us of our lives while tricking us into leaving behind who we are and were meant to be, the wild violence of riding the torrents of progress that tear us away from our roots, the individual and collective stupidity of trading in something good for something promoted as much better which always magically ends up far worse, the increasing enslavement not only to technology and science but to government and the power of the state which promise greater freedoms only to take them all away. Or, as Jung expressed himself in one of his interviews that never quite made its way into print, this is the evil of those who set themselves up as vicious innovators. And, by that, he is not just meaning what's technologically new but what's spiritually new; innovative ways of communication, interaction, education; better ways of doing good, more enlightened methods of waking up; every spiritual solution which seems to offer a fresh new alternative to our corrupt modern world of progress and materi- alism but is just a prettier part of it, a fancier extension. In other words we are each of us, without even noticing it, vicious developers: are all Fausts carried along in our "hubris and inflation", murderers of Philemon and his wife every day. We are the ones who keep burning their cottage down with the intensity of our thoughts and the cleverness of our actions, because this is the way of the times." And this is why Jungians who are willing to listen to Jung are such a rare breed -- because what he says is so utterly unreasonable, so absurdly and obviously unacceptable in our contemporary world. It would cost ever so much to look far enough inside ourselves to catch a glimpse of the bottomless truth that dismissing his. message with such instant self-assurance is simply one more proof of our inflation and hubris. After all, there is no need to go the whole way to hell just to discover everyone's complicity in an evil they are already quite happy admitting to. BACK TO THE SOURCE 181 The trouble is that we have arrived at a point where Jung is steering well away from what could seem to be the manageable problem of one, or two, individual patients' unhealthy inflation towards something far more terrifyingly real: collective infla- tion. And while nothing could be easier than to sit down and wisely discuss the collective inflation experienced by Germans during the lead-up to either of the first two world wars, we are never going to feel at all comfortable sitting down to confront the mass inflation of the culture we now live in -- which is why a third world war is guaranteed. Very pointedly, just as he is adding the final words to one of his most important works on alchemy, he comes straight back to the murder of Philemon and Baucis. As strongly as he can, he emphasizes that Faust's crazy inflation isn't the inflation of some real or fictitious individual. It's the inflation of the masses; and "the masses are blind brutes, as we know to our cost." Then he goes on to say that a remedy exists for this collective inflation, which is discoverable in private. But such a remedy "is nothing that can be held up to the masses -- only some hidden thing that we can hold up to ourselves in solitude and in silence. Very few people care to know anything about this; it is so much easier to preach the universal panacea to everybody else than to take it oneself" because then one might suddenly be forced to doubt everything. And, naturally, "no doubts can exist in the herd; the bigger the crowd the better the truth -- and the greater the catastrophe.""" This is the remedy of repentance: of Jung's penitence, the hidden thing that he held up to himself in solitude and silence. It's to perform the invisible, but unbelievably painful, penance of having to atone through the fabric of one's life for the collective crimes of humanity. And only inwardly can anybody guess how much appalling darkness and hardship someone might have to face and what gruesome sacrifices might have to be made 182 PART TWO in the sacred process of compensating for the unconsciousness and cruelty, the self-absorption and forgetfulness, of a whole country; of a continent; of the world we live in. Of course this might sound almost as grim as it actually is. But the thing is that by turning away from the evil we don't make it disappear, and if we don't fully face the evil inside ourselves it follows us in everything. Then we can be going out and dancing and doing the most wonderfully stimulating things while tormenting Jung's spirit, haunted by the darkness inside us. And perhaps, just perhaps, it's only by going into the depths of ourselves that we will ever come to discover real joy. Exactly the same as before, we are left with two magics. One, as Jung himself explains in an unpublished interview, belongs to the devil: is the vicious magic of ruthless innovation, of the new assassinating the old. The other is the magic of the solitary magician, of Philemon -- or Merlin. This, unlike the magic of the masses, is the secret and sacred task of protecting the past by leaving it undisturbed; by respect- ing one's ancestors, honouring the elders. Or, as Jung's views on the subject have more publicly and politely been summed up: it means "recognition of 'the ancient'", means working inwardly to ensure the continuity of history and culture." To speak out like this about recognition of the ancient, about the continuity of history, can seem innocent enough. But actually to communicate something about it is a very different proposition -- because the past he is referring to isn't some token history book, or a handy collection of myths and symbols on the bookshelf, or even a curious trip to some museum. It's what once used to be the only logic, the logic of the dead, but now is laughably absurd. It's the dead themselves who call to us through the wind, sing to us through the birds, speak to us through children or our own visions and dreams. It's everything BACK TO THE SOURCE 183 that eludes us as soon as we think a single thought, or just move to see it better, because there is no space at all for it in our ruthlessly functional world. And we can never be sure if what we really saw for such a brief moment was the magic of another world appearing in this, or the magic of this world erasing that. That's why even to say these words, in our ever so reasonable existence which is falling apart as I speak, is almost impossibly difficult. Simply to be able to write them, arrange one word to follow another, is itself an act of magic -- not to mention penitence. And to make any sense of them, to be able to follow them: that needs an act of magic, too. Jung often noted he was such a complicated individual and had so many sides to him that no one person could ever hope to map them all, which is true enough because his life branched off into so many different outlets. At the same time, this is only half of his story. What so mysteriously but predictably has been forgotten is the hidden root of Jung, from which all the other branches flowed. Repeatedly he tried to point to it as best he could; mentioned it here, there, often in the most unlikely of places. And through his whole adult life it always remained the same. He already lays it out not in one of his later works on alche- my, or during some interview shortly before he died, but while he was still in his thirties and working away at the Red book: "We are a blinded and deluded race." The only thing we know is how to exist on the surface of ourselves, live only for today, use our minds for thinking only of tomorrow. As for the past, "we behave towards it like brutes because we are not willing to receive the dead". Instead, we are only interested in doing the kind of work that brings visible results or success; and "above all we want to be paid." To do some hidden work that offers no one any visible benefit or service would probably strike anybody as insane. 184 PART TWO But this insanity is just what's needed because "there is one indispensable, although strange and hidden work you have to do in secret: your most important work, your masterpiece". This is the inner work you have to do before you can ever discover your outer work in life. It's the work that you need to do, not for the sake of the people around you -- but for the sake of the dead "who demand the work of atonement" and won't let you live until you do it. So "don't look forward too much, but back and into yourself in case you fail to hear the dead." In a strange but realistic way it's all for the best that most people do fail to hear the dead and do fail to hear Jung, because the past inside ourselves isn't just the source of life or purpose. It's also the ocean of the unconscious -- infinitely fascinating, vastly treacherous and deceptive." Nothing is easier than to get lost there. And whoever wants to travel into it needs one thing as badly as a compass, which is the precision of focus. What Jung found there -- inside himself, deep in the past of his own culture -- is something he often referred to throughout his life and tried to explain, as best he could. Again, though, almost as if by magic the image he conjures into view quickly mists over and keeps drifting off out of sight. If you are not able to stay focused on it, you will lose your bearings and forget you ever saw anything. If you concentrate too much on some detail, you will end up trapped inside the limits of your psychology and the artificial structures of your mind. But whoever is ready to keep it gently and firmly in focus will start, little by little, to make out the outlines of Jung's life -- and, behind, of the hidden mystery at the heart of our western world. There is a time when -- reminiscing as an old man -- Carl Jung relived in the sharpest detail his original experience of going back into history and sinking into the past. He had been fascinated for years, when he was younger, with the legend of the Grail. Already he had started to ask himself: what is this Grail, this famous treasure so hard to attain? But Christianity gave no answer. In fact this is the one question Christianity is unable to answer. Gradually he became aware of the huge gulf or gap in time dividing the medieval myth of the knights of the Grail from the far more distant past of antiquity. And he knew that to find his answer he was going to have to make his way beyond Christian- ity; get behind it. Then he describes just what happened. To begin with, he let himself be carried back to the time of the knights in their quest for the Grail. But the only result was that he found himself plunged into total and utter darkness -- not a single response or reply. It wasn't until, like some inner archaeologist, he became able at last to descend all the way to the third century after Christ that he finally felt something change. Instead of nothing but darkness he began to notice things getting brighter, the beginning of light. He had the unmistakable sensation: here lives a part of myself. 186 PART TWO And this was his discovery of the Gnostics, including Philemon. It was as if there was something of him in them and something of them in him, as if by reaching back through the past to his teacher in the figure of Philemon he had encountered his real self -- had arrived at what, on the deepest level, he recognized to be his own truest shape and form. Here he was, home at last, not with his blood relatives or physical ancestors but together with his most intimate spiritual family where he belonged.* So he had literally found himself, there as well as here at the same time: two Jungs, or two halves of one Jung, almost two thousand years apart. And, as always happens, from the first moment that he found himself he was lost. He was with himself, reunited with his teacher, with those he belonged to and who belonged to him, in a period close to the time of Christ. He was in the twentieth century, too. The wisdom had started to flow from him, back then, into the newer him right now. But as for how he could consciously connect these two Jungs, make sense of their interaction, still he had no answer. Once again there was the enormous gap, the hiatus, the unbridgeable distance between present and past. The Gnostics already had the basics of psychology; had confronted the arche- types in their lives and experiences; were up against the reality of a collective unconscious that powers our existence, defines and shapes our whole world. As for what lay between them then, though, and us now: "they lived in the first, second and third centuries. And what was in between? Nothing" -- nothing but a gaping hole. It was one of those riddles that could easily, to use his own expression, have made him lose his head. But, to his credit, he had the courage and integrity to avoid looking around outside himself for some cheap solution. And only eventually did he come to see that this nothing wasn't just nothing. BACK TO THE SOURCE 187 Only ever so slowly did he start to realize that the hole wasn't a hole. On the contrary, he began to become aware of an unbroken lineage linking and connecting the ancient Gnostics to our modern world: often hidden, sometimes persecuted, always to some degree or other submerged. That was the western tradition of alchemy, also known as Hermetic philosophy or the mythical golden chain. Now he had the bridge from himself and his physical family back to himself, his teacher, his innermost family. And this is what alchemy would always be for him- -- a bridge, simply a bridge.®! But simple things are always the most difficult ones to under- stand: always the most elusive and the hardest to hold gently, as well as firmly, in view. It's so easy to forget what makes a bridge a bridge and that its whole purpose is to allow people to get across. Instead, those who invest their minds and lives in busily helping to construct a bridge can soon end up itching to build their home on it and missing any larger sense of what exists on either side. All it takes is the slightest iota of self-importance or self-interest and the greater perspective, so subtle, so hard-won, is suddenly lost. A bridge is about flow, as opposed to constriction or rigidity; about fluidity and movement; about the trafhc of continuity. This is why, to Jung, there could never be any question of alchemy as opposed to Gnosticism. Quite to the contrary: for him the one flowed effortlessly into the other because alchemical tradition, itself, was Gnostic through and through." And even the separate phases of his life that he is supposed to have dedicated to studying Gnostic tradition first, only followed by alchemy much later, are largely a myth. Naturally the emphasis and apparent priorities had to shift with the passing of time. 188 PART TWO The fact, though, which happens to be a fact particularly rich in significance is that he was already becoming acquainted with alchemy as soon as he started his studies of the Gnostics -- in much the same way that he would continue working on Gnosticism for the rest of his days.* But to see such a whole as the whole it is involves having to hold the completeness of it, its living reality, silently in the stillness of one's inner self. Focus too much on this detail or that and you are lost because, paradoxically, the only way to keep one's clarity is by viewing everything from the perspective of the surrounding blackness. This, after all, is the reason why Jung tried the best he could to emphasize that the sense of historical continuity which was so crucial for him belongs to the world of personality no. 2 -- and can only be appreciated by someone attuned to the vast regions "of inner darkness'. Of course, judged by the spirit of our age, in saying such things he was stepping way out of line. To conventional histori- ans, or at least those few scholars prepared to waste time in studying him, history is strictly their domain and Jung with his amateurish fantasies about historical continuity was just an imposter. But the joke is on them because, very simply, he understood the all-important materials far better than them; had laboured for years to become fluent in the ancient lan- guages which they, if they bothered to read any of the texts at all, could mostly only approach through poor translations; knew his way around the subtleties of the evidence with an openness and an attentiveness even the greatest experts couldn't match because, like his friend as well as colleague Henry Corbin, he understood that the so-called facts of history will always remain a closed book without entering the mystery which lies behind them. BACK TO THE SOURCE 189 And he did these things, outstripped scholars in their scholarship to a degree they were hardly able to notice, because for him much more was at stake than they could ever imagine." Many academics tend to feel quite free to come up with whatever new theories or crazy hypotheses they want -- in fact often the crazier the better. But for Jung it was never about need- ing to be clever, although this can seem almost impossible to understand. Instead, it was about the most serious and solemn of obliga- tions: about his responsibilities towards the living and, above all, his duties towards the dead. The thing about the dead, which should only rarely be said because one never knows who is saying it, is that they are not just dead. Whether approached correctly or wrongly, respected or forgotten, acknowledged or ignored, they are far more alive than we are. In one way or another they live with us, through us, as us. "They still live on." A second thing about the dead is that, in whatever matters to them, they demand the most uncompromising precision. And a third is that whenever life happens to be viewed from their perspective, everything looks back to front like in some kind of mirror -- appearing as just the opposite of what we are pleasantly ready to expect. What from our side of the bridge seems perfectly solid and real is the purest fantasy to them while what, to us, seems nothing but fantasy is the firmest of foundations on the other side. This is the reason why, far from boasting that through his masterful scientific work he had managed at last to place the bizarrely fantastic world of Gnostics and alchemists on a solid foundation, Jung stated the exact reverse: that only the solid foundation offered by Gnosticism, and by alchemy in leading 190 PART TWO back to the Gnostics, had managed to stop his whole psychology from remaining the emptiest and hollowest "phantasmagoria".® It was only the historical continuity they were able to provide that had the power to bring him, along with his work, back into the real world. And this reality lies not in the hectic rush of ephemeral present moments that keep tearing, dragging us further away from ourselves; not even in the meditative stillness of the present moment which becomes just another excuse for escaping our primordial nature. On the contrary, it lies in the depths of a living past which every present moment exists to serve -- because that's where our true root and purpose are waiting to be found.*® Noticed, or unnoticed, this historical continuity is the bed- rock of his work and his psychology. But, as so often, we can stand watching him repeat the same statements only to see them immediately being washed away by the tides of time. For example, there is the one rare talk he grudgingly agreed to give about the Gnostics in which he explained that "if we seek genuine psychological understanding of the human being of our own time, we must know his spiritual history absolutely." By spiritual history he meant, very specifically, the two thousand years connecting us back through the past of western culture to the time of the Gnostics. To him this recognition of the ancient, as he called it, wasn't a matter of theory or academic speculation. It was a question of the most urgent practice. Jung was speaking as a healer, a psychiatrist, a clinician when he kept insisting there can be no real cure of a human being without understanding that person's true history. And he wasn't just talking about childhood history or even parental history, because "we are not of today or of yesterday; we are of an immense age." Or as I once wrote: "We're ancient, incredibly ancient. We hold the history of the stars in our pockets." BACK TO THE SOURCE 191 It was as a caring doctor trying to help his patients deal with their apparent sufferings, their everyday neuroses, that he claimed the only genuine treatment often lies in drawing them out from the little world of their personal troubles into an aware- ness of the "supra-personal connections" behind what they are experiencing -- into "a supra-personal consciousness with a sense of historical continuity". The only healing for them exists in taking them beyond themselves. The only attitude or state of mind that can help them is a truly religious attitude: not religion as dogmas or creeds, but "the religious attitude per se". And it's precisely for allowing this religious attitude to emerge "that the sense of historical continuity is indispensable". This is what the ancient Greeks and Romans meant by the process of being reborn, the mystical process of rebirth out of the personal into the impersonal. Otherwise, everything in an individual's attitude will be "obviously wrong". This is how one single person's seeming neurosis can be undone, because what manifests as private neuroses is for the most part simply a lack of history -- the collective neurosis of a culture that abandoned its ancestors and, in the process, forgot itself. What feels so wrong inside us is what already went wrong in history, and of course the other way around. Our modern-day neuroses arent just one person's problem, your problem, mine. They are the delayed result, postponed but perfectly inevitable, of what happened to the Gnostics two thousand years ago at the point in time when orthodox Christianity suppressed and crushed their truth: obliterated their wisdom. And the message from the heart of Jung's psychology is that unless we understand inside ourselves what happened then, we are never going to be free now. It's exactly the same, again, with Aristotle -- and the way he forced the western mind to deviate "from its original basis" 192 PART TWO by making it leave the psyche, our one true source of direct experience, behind. Only when we start turning back to where we come from, back to what in spite of all our modernities we still are, can any real or lasting healing occur. And that's the labour of repentance for the crimes of the unrepentant; recognition of the ancient in the maintenance of continuity; restoration of the bridge. This is the reason why Jung's famous biography announces that without history there can be absolutely no psychology. But such a provocative statement is so open to misinterpretation that it can also be helpful to look at some of the much more specific things he said which were never allowed into print. For instance there is his unpublished, forgotten statement about just how crucially important the ability to read ancient Greek or Latin texts had been to him; and to be able to read them not in translation, but direct in the original language. Without a thorough working knowledge of those languages, he claims, it's impossible to come to any real insight into western culture -- or arrive at any authentic understanding of psychology.®' One could probably count on the fingers of a single hand the number of Jungian theorists and practitioners who have taken this advice to heart, or would ever be prepared to do so. It's far more profitable to rush off and, while claiming to be working in his name, build even more Faustian bridges across to nowhere. And that's quite a shame, because then one throws away the chance of discovering what Jung discovered or seeing what he saw. One of the greatest miracles in existence is the way that, for us as humans to begin with, this material world becomes our only foundation and basis. If we ever have the courage to turn and steal a glance into the world of the unconscious, the only thing we can see is bottomless chaos and an infinitely swirling abyss without any firm basis or foundation at all. BACK TO THE SOURCE 193 But if we are able to muster the far greater courage needed to throw ourselves into that abyss, after falling and losing sight of anything solid for what feels like an eternity we finally arrive at the reality familiar to alchemists as the "everlasting foundation' -- or referred to by Jung as the "indestructible foundation". Naturally, for the sake of our sanity as human beings, we always keep that longing to have a strong and stable foothold in the physical world. 'This is simply a symbol, though, of that other foundation; and nothing is ever the same after at last finding the real foothold somewhere else.® That's where we are confronted with the primordial pre- cision, the incalculable fineness of detail and structure, beyond anything imaginable in this ephemeral world of the living. That's the uncanny exactness and compactness of Parmenides' otherworldly logic which he was instructed to bring straight back from the realms of the dead. And, in the case of Carl Jung, what he was shown was the precisest outlines of a structure spanning two thousand years -- the vast structure reaching back from our present day through all the whirling mists and darkness past alchemists, then Gnostics, to the dawn of western culture. Once someone has been taken into another world and given a vision of reality, the whole game of personal existence is over. There have never been any people who were presented with such visions for themselves. The primordial law states that whatever is provided in the underworld is only given so it can be carried back, unchanged, intact, to the world of the living. That's the sacred contract, signed at the beginning of time, between the living and the dead. This is why, as Jung duly noted, at a specific point he no longer belonged to himself alone and no longer even had the right to do so. From then on, his life belonged to the living as well as the dead: existed for the "generality", for the sake of the whole. And Jung himself understood that when you truly no longer live for yourself or belong to yourself then you become, just like Christ, a source of life for others.*? Only then, when the personal inside a person gracefully or reluctantly gives way to what lies beyond the personal, is when one starts being able to grasp the true meaning of urgency -- the nearly unbearable, burning urgency of eternity pressing onto and right into time. This was the urgency that, at the start of 1938 in Kolkata, burst through Jung's dream about the Grail and forced him back BACK TO THE SOURCE 195 with a jolt from India to the West: back to its desperate need for the healing vessel or servator mundi which is the only thing capable of protecting and saving the western world. "For your state is perilous; you are all in imminent danger of destroying all that centuries have built up." There is a sad inevitability about the way that, with the particular rigidity and dogmatism only a dutiful disciple can provide, such a momentous statement would end up being embellished with the usual half-truths or half-untruths. As perhaps the most influential Jungian went on to note in commenting on this dream, inside the healing vessel of the Grail lies "the answer to the spiritual problem of our cultural tradition' -- which is true enough. But then she has to add that "this secret, however, is contained nowhere save in the symbolism of alchemy" which Jung was focusing most of his conscious attention on at the time." It can be such an irresistible temptation to divide a person's life into separate phases of work; into new fields of discovery and understanding. We don't even realize that this, too, is the Faustian solution: getting sucked along by the illusions and seductions of progress. In fact the pull is so strong that one can howl and cry and warn but there is nobody, not even those close by who could or should, who will ever notice. And it's precisely the same in our own lives. Wisdom's beginning is to give up on the endless fuss of looking hopefully into the future for some final solution to our ignorance, some perfect correction to the mess we've made so far. It starts in the same way it ends -- with looking back, exactly as Jung recommended, and into oneself. Instead of stepping forwards we have to walk backwards into the place inside us all where the answers already lie and have always been waiting." That, in a simple word or two, is the essence of this whole book. 196 PART TWO Dreams, especially the big dreams, never tell our lives in a straight line. They dance around, then back on themselves in circles or spirals. And when Jung was reminded inside his Kolkata hotel of the crucial need to find the healing vessel of the Grail he was just being reminded, in the way only dreams can do, of what he already knew. For a long time before visiting India he had been writing, lecturing, teaching that the symbolism of the Grail reaches back past the medieval alchemists into the Gnostic and Hermetic traditions of antiquity. To be a little more specific: he traced it straight back to the magical symbol of the dratér, an old Greek word for the mysterious mixing-bowl that initiates threw themselves into so they could be baptized into rebirth and immortality and salvation. As it so happens, almost ten years earlier than that dramatic Kolkata dream he was half-jokingly talking with students about how anyone nowadays wanting to find the &ratér of the Gnostics -- the healing vessel of rebirth and salvation -- shouldn't look for it any more in the ancient alchemical centres of Egypt. Instead it could be found, quite simply, in Zurich. And to make things even clearer he playfully if unsubtly hinted that not only was this dratér the psychological work he did with his patients, but he himself was the living kratér. He, Carl Jung, was the eternal fountain of youth: the saviour offering humans the pharmakon athanasias, "the medicine of immortality which makes the new man". This was far more than some joke, though. On the contrary, the logic behind it all was impeccable. Just as the only way for a knight to discover the Grail was by becoming it, and just as the only way to serve the servator mundi is inwardly to be the saviour and protector of the world, so the one and only way to make the kratér work is by becoming the kratér oneself. BACK TO THE SOURCE 197 And to get a sense of how profoundly serious this whole matter was for him, nothing can be better than to remember that he envisaged the entire "prehistory of his psychology" -- meaning the history of Jungian psychology before any Carl Jung appeared on the scene -- as embodied in one single symbol. Needless to say, that was the symbol of the 4razér. So, in just the same way that he came to equate the mystery of the Grail with the secret of individuation and would see it as his central task to recover the abandoned Grail vessel for the sake of the West, he had discovered in the Gnostic vessel of the Arazér the primordial symbol of his own psychology." But strange as it might seem, to be watching Jung trace his psychology back beyond himself, there is one other factor we have to bear in mind. In his published writings, as well as his lectures, he made sure to track this quintessential symbol of the kratér even further than the Gnostic and Hermetic circles of antiquity. In fact already from the very first time that he ever refers to the kratér of rebirth, he specifically connects it with the name of one particular person: Empedocles. Since the time when he was still a young student he had never managed to shake off his fascination with the ancient legends about how Empedocles died in Sicily by climbing the crater of Mount Etna -- then throwing himself into the volcano so he could become immortal, be reborn as a god. And here, as Jung was quick to recognize with his fine eye for the sense of words, is where the old Greek term Aratér no longer just meant some pretty mixing-bowl or carefully fabricated vessel. Instead, it was the crater of a magnificent volcano seething with lava and water and fire -- one of the most terrifying examples on earth of nature's utterly inhuman power to destroy, transform, give birth. 198 PART TWO Here, with these legends about Empedocles predating not only medieval alchemy but even Gnosticism by centuries, he realized he had got back as far as it was possible to go to the source and origin of all those traditions about a kratér as well as a Grail: to the earliest prehistory of his own psychology. As you may have guessed, though, there is much more to the matter than that. For Jung, history was the diametrical opposite of what we've come to think of as history. Actually to go back into the past wasn't a question of wandering off into the blank irrelevance of hundreds or thousands of years -- but of returning to the primordial source of one's life, one's inspiration, one's existence. And from the time of his work on the Red book right through to the end of his life he was perfectly clear about the nature, as well as the identity, of his own primordial source. The single point of origin for all his later work and understanding was the experiences he laboured first to endure, then embody, then make sense of, through his Red dook. But the source of those visionary experiences themselves was the overwhelming outflows of lava he had happened to bump into at the scene of a massive volcanic crater: the crater that gave him access to the underworld. So, with the ancient Greek philosopher who is known as Empedocles, Jung had arrived at the root of his psychology in every meaningful sense. Historically, he had reached the ultimate source of its lineage and pedigree. And symbolically, energetically, psychologically, he was all the way back again at the primordial origin of its unstoppable vitality: right at the source of its raw, transformative power." Of course even to think of linking Jung and his psychology to some ancient philosopher is bound, nowadays, to sound like a blatant example of stretching the evidence too far. But, quite to the contrary: it's only by allowing the evidence to speak for itself, BACK TO THE SOURCE 199 without any pulling or stretching or concealing, that we can help what Jung called the real "historical pattern" to emerge. For him the all-important point of historical reference was the ancient Gnostics. And he was as familiar as anyone, far more familiar than most, with the complex multiplicity of influences that had constantly fed into both Gnostic and Hermetic tradi- tions -- from Egypt, Mesopotamia, Judaism, Christianity, Greek religions or philosophies. As a matter of fact without any appreciation on our part for such complexities, for the so-called syncretism of such different influences, there are details and aspects of Jung's writings we will never be able to understand." But this makes it even more striking that, when he came to explain how he viewed the phenomenon of Gnosticism, he described it as first and foremost a philosophical tradition firmly planted in the lineage of Greek philosophy. And it's exactly the same story, which ought to be no cause at all for surprise, when he turns to alchemy. In a letter he once sent to his Jewish friend, Erich Neumann, he stated without any hesitation that not only his own psychol- ogy but also western alchemy "is deeply rooted in Europe, in the Christian Middle Ages and ultimately in Greek philosophy". This has disappointed, even angered, some commentators who would much rather that Jung had kept silent about philosophy and said almost anything else instead. The simple truth is, though, that here we have him being perfectly clear about how he views and experiences his own work -- because here, especially in the statement about Greek philosophy, we have "his explicit confession as to his own tradition". And there is a double logic hidden behind that statement of his. 200 PART TWO On the one hand, while well aware of Egyptian and other elements that contributed to alchemical tradition in the West, he had the profoundest respect for the alchemists' own insistence on describing themselves as "philosophers". Over time he learned to live and breathe with the countless references they make throughout their texts to the philosophers' stone, the philosophers' vessel, the philosophical fire; to the philosophical art and work and task which is the true philos- ophy, as opposed to the philosophy of Aristotle; to the garden of philosophers with its philosophical tree, the riddles of the philosophers, the ancient gatherings and assemblies of philos- ophers. He was only too familiar with the fact that Greek, then Arab, then Latin alchemical literature often makes a point of looking back in particular to the great Presocratic philosophers as supreme masters of the art. And he was finely attuned to the exquisite subtleties of a situation where, two thousand years after Parmenides' death, an alchemical writer in Italy could describe how it was Parmenides who had saved him from his errors by guiding him onto the right path -- just as there happen to have been Arab alchemists and mystics who gathered together into "Empedocles circles" because they had found in Empedocles a greater authority, a truer source of prophecy and revelation, than even Muhammad himself." But as usual that's just a part of the story because, on the other hand, there is Carl Jung's own connection to philosophy. For modern philosophy, which "never says anything of the slightest practical value" with its hollow theorizing and useless jargon, he felt little aside from disappointment or downright contempt. This makes it all the more remarkable, though, that when asked if his psychology was just another religion he would say no: Don't compare my psychology to the established religions with their lumbering pretensions and dogmas and creeds. The truth is that, far from being a missionary or founder of some BACK TO THE SOURCE 201 new religion, "I am speaking just as a philosopher" because we psychologists "are philosophers in the old sense of the word, lovers of wisdom". And the best way of all to understand this psychology of mine, he would add, is to compare it to ancient philosophy. Of course that raises an obvious question about what kind of ancient philosophy Jung was referring to. He was hardly think- ing of Plato, who to him had always been the classic example of a theorist so full of smart ideas he was never able to apply them in practice. He certainly wasn't thinking of Aristotle, either, who in his mind was more responsible than anyone else for forcing western consciousness to deviate from its natural course. But as for what existed before this Aristotelian deviation or diversion, the most striking thing is that he goes almost completely silent."° And there is a very good reason for that silence because, in spite of all his intuitions and inner affinities and well-founded suspicions, something far more powerful was governing his understanding of Presocratic philosophy: sheer, unfettered prejudice. He already lays his cards on the table when he states that, right from its formal start with Pythagoras, western philosophy had never been anything more than the densest kind of intellectualism and rationalism "as moulded by the Greeks". But that's because he is just parroting the bastard wisdom endlessly churned out by the German textbooks of philosophy he had been devouring since he was a child -- textbooks which mindlessly projected the rampant rationalism of the eighteenth, nineteenth, twentieth centuries back onto the ancient world. It's exactly the same when he declares that the Presocratic philosophers were concerned with physical objects, instead of consciousness. And this was especially true of "the nature philos- ophers like Empedocles" who had the most "marvellous naiveté" 202 PART TWO with regard to the objects of nature, or nature herself, because at their stage in history they had not yet been graced with the opportunity for self-reflection and inner awareness which would only be made available to humanity through Socrates or Plato. But that, too, is simply the inflated evolutionary nonsense which would lead the collective western mind into two world wars and which Jung as an intelligent European of his own time was forced to live and breathe. And it's the same all over again with his almost laughably disjointed description of Empedocles as "one of the very early Greek philosophers and a sort of saviour' -- because this is how every single handbook of ancient philosophy would introduce the man, as a hopelessly divided character who tried to live the respectable life of a philosopher and scientist on the one hand while falling into all sorts of religious quackery on the other. Still, while there is nothing very virtuous in this rehashing by Jung of the wisdom of his time, there is nothing particularly unvirtuous about it either. After all, it was Jung himself who had the rare humility and deep self-knowledge needed to admit that no one alive is "immune to the spirit of his own epoch" -- and that "regardless of our conscious convictions, we are all without exception, in so far as we are particles in the mass, gnawed at and undermined by the spirit that runs through the masses." Or as Empedocles had tried to say almost two and a half thousand years earlier, even those who go out of their way to speak the most uncom- fortable truths are forced to accept that mostly they are just going to have to play along with the normal conventions like anyone else. To be sure, there were times when Jung thoroughly enjoyed performing the role of sophisticated modern scientist: when he absolutely loved spouting the usual clichés about primitiveness and naivety and cultural evolution even though he knew inside BACK TO THE SOURCE 203 himself, far more than any of his proud disciples, just how superficial and deceptive they happen to be. And this is because he also knew when to leave things well alone. So many signs and pointers were leading him back to the ancient, Presocratic philosophers. But the essential point is that it was never his duty or his job to follow them. There are some things that one has to be either a total fool or a helpless victim to get involved in. Jung understood the truth of this better than anybody, which is why he put off getting involved in the intricacies of alchemical tradition for as long as he possibly could. And when eventually he realized he was going to have to surrender almost a half of his adult life to unravelling the mysteries surrounding western alchemy, he saw it as his unavoidable curse and damnation. That was his task: not to make his way back even further, past the Gnostics into the collective darkness surrounding the origins of western civilization, but to make his way forward from them into the modern world." And this is where my work comes in. It took the better part of half a lifetime to discover, then document, that the Presocratics weren't the primitive rationalists they have been made out to be by hundreds and thousands of years of accumulated prejudice; to trace out every detail of the paths that led back from the Gnostic or Hermetic circles of Egypt to Empedocles, Parmenides, the Pythagoreans in Sicily as well as southern Italy; to show that western alchemical literature did derive in the most meaningful way from Presocratic tradition and that, when alchemists put what seemed to be sayings of their own into the mouths of their ancestors, they were often preserving genuine elements of Presocratic teaching which the more intellectualizing lineages of Aristotle or Plato had already stripped away; to explain how the stale rubbish we have been fed for centuries about rational Greeks versus prophetic Hebrews 204 PART TWO and about the cold intellect of Athens versus the passion of Jerusalem was meant to cover over the fact that both Greeks and Jews had their prophetic traditions which were linked to each other even geographically, physically; and that the truest successors of figures like Parmenides or Empedocles weren't later Greek philosophers but the greatest of Gnostic prophets. Strangely enough, in the process I found myself document- ing how the symbolism of the Gnostic or Hermetic dratér does reach back to the volcanic craters of Sicily and Italy. But I was also able to demonstrate that the stories of Empedocles' death weren't about his physical death at all. That was the crudest of misunderstandings. The legends of him throwing himself into the crater of Mount Etna were, in origin, coded accounts of his ritual descent into the world of the dead. In fact this massive volcano happened to be a major, very ancient centre of prophecy. Temples had been built out of lava on its slopes; families of prophets, referred to as "dream -- prophets" because they specialized in the interpretation of people's dreams, were living surrounded by bubbling craters of water and mud right beside the volcano's edge. And considering Empedocles' famous role as a prophet himself -- not to mention the intimate connections between those legends of his leap into Etna and the biblical figure of Elijah in particular -- it was more than a little peculiar to find Jung describing in his Red b00k how when he arrived at the bottom of the great crater inside the underworld he happened to be standing right beside "the house of the prophet", the prophet Elijah. But as for the silliness about Empedocles being one of the earliest Greek philosophers plus "a sort of saviour" on the side: that wasn't the case at all. In fact it would be hard to state the truth of the matter more incorrectly, because Empedocles BACK TO THE SOURCE 205 the philosopher was Empedocles the saviour. His philosophical teaching was his unnoticed work of salvation and his saving work was his philosophy."® The personal dimension, for Empedocles just as much as for Jung, of making a jump into the underworld through a volcano was ruthlessly simple. Ritual or no ritual, it was to risk insanity if not outright death. First it meant being totally melted down into the most basic elements of what one is; recast and re-fused into one's own primordial origin. Then it's a matter of watching yourself being fused with the primordial, elemental origins of the entire physical world." That, of course, is the point where you no longer live for yourself because inwardly you no longer are yourself as a person. And the streaming lava, for Empedocles, wasn't just the flow of his own poetry or creativity. It was the molten lava that threw up the shape and form of an entire culture, that erupted into time so it could bring our western civilization into being -- because new cultures don't just happen by themselves. On the contrary, they are born when the right people in the right place at the right moment have the ferocious courage to leave all the dead crustings of civilization behind and leap into the volcano of themselves. It never quite made sense that Jung would only want to trace the source of his own psychology back to a bunch of solitary alchemists or some ragtag group of Gnostic heretics. But here we have what lies behind them all: the founders of a new civilization, the burning purpose at the heart of our western world. Ever since that blind visit I unwittingly paid to Bollingen over thirty years ago, I have kept seeing the same image of a tunnel being dug through an enormous mountain. The hole was being bored by two men who started at opposite ends and were going to complete their work by meeting, halfway, in the middle. One of them was Jung; I was the other. It was only much later that, well into the process of writing this book, I began to discover how important for him the imagery of digging or boring had happened to be. From the first moment I sat down to write I had the physical, constant, almost eviscerating experience of not simply reaching down into some unconscious depths. Instead I was being forced to describe, then keep reporting, what I found as I quite literally scraped the very bottom of the unconscious. Nothing could be more deeply, impossibly inhuman; closer at every moment to insanity; nearer to physical death. But it was no surprise eventually to come across Jung's own mention of those who manage to "touch the black bottom of human existence' -- while everyone else flits around as flat and tepid phantoms ecstatic at the shallowness of their coastlines, at the tedious mediocrity of their wide and busy roads. BACK TO THE SOURCE 207 As for that process of cutting and scraping a hole through the mountain of stone: this is where you learn the darker mean- ing of eternity because it's so infinitely slow. Of course you could say how absurdly arrogant I'm sound- ing, to dare set myself on a level with Jung -- let alone to talk about helping to complete what he left undone. But that would only show you haven't understood a thing. All the excruciating boring is eventually so painful that there is nothing of a person left. Then one day one wakes up to discover what it means to be faceless. There are no masks there, no personalities, because if there were you wouldn't survive a minute. And this is the biggest problem of all with wanting to approach someone like Carl Jung -- a problem that usually gets larger the closer you get. It's so tempting to see him as a personality and then like him, hate him, love him; be amazed at his creativity or threatened by it; assiduously ignore him or turn him into the cornerstone, the foundation, of your life. That's all an illusion and utter self-deception, though, because there is no understanding him without understanding what lies behind him. If Jung had just been a scientist, his life and work would never have become such eternal objects of fascination. If he had simply been a mystic, no one would ever have cared so much. But his science coupled with his mysticism is what's so irresistible because it pulls us straight back past him, way beyond his personality, to the impersonal reality that lies buried at the roots of our western world and contains the secret of what our culture was meant to be. This is the reason why his published biography begins with a single statement which has probably been read a million times and, perhaps, been understood once or twice in any blue moon: 208 PART TWO "My life is a story of the self-realization of the unconscious." In other words, there is no Jung. His life wasn't the story of Jung realizing himself. It was a story of the unconscious realizing itself through the passing appearance of a conscious Jung. And when you come to that point of awareness there is no one there: just a darkly mysterious substance. There is a body and a voice and hands, but only the primordial power of the unconscious emerging through a human form. Then there is nobody at all -- only the carved stone inscriptions once left behind for Parmenides in his old hometown, or the inscriptions carved by Jung as he worked away on his own stone tablets at Bollingen. That's what happens when you carve yourself into living stone through the words you write, the breaths you take, until the stone is all that's left.'°° THE SUNSET WAY I have visited Parmenides' hometown of Velia -- where the inscriptions carved out of marble for him as well as other prophet -- healers were found; where his logic was given to him along with all his science -- just once in my life. It was the spring of 1999 and the archaeologist in charge of the area allowed me to stay at a large house she owned, within walking distance of the site where I could inspect the inscriptions and statues every day. I became friends with a local couple who invited me to dinner one evening. But a strange, inner prompting told me not to accept: simply to go to bed early instead. And almost as if it had been waiting to see if I would accept its invitation, I was visited by an intensely vivid dream. I am a small boy but a grown man at the same time. My parents -- these were my "real" parents as opposed to my physical parents -- own land, beautiful fields, fields of my heart. But one day I arrive home to find that they have given the go-ahead for people to come in and cut most of the trees down; make everything respectable, domestic, lined up in neat rows. The trees have been cut down here, there, all chopped back. The wildness, the primitive power and magic, are ruined: gone. I stand there in total shock, alone. My parents aren't home yet. It's as if they have deliberately left, or just pretended to go 214 PART THREE out, so they won't be there when I come back. The horror has reverberated through the depths of my being. It's totally gone: that magic, wonder, power, that being which had been mine, which I used to be part of. Now it's just docked, domesticated garden land. And a man comes up to me in a slighty shabby business raincoat, beige or grey. He starts speaking to me very affably, ever so shrewdly. He says that of course I know what it's all about because I, like he, understand the importance of legal assessment work. I know what's what. I know why such things need to be done for insurance purposes -- realistically, and so on, and so on. And I start to cry. I don't mean cry in the sense of weeping, but cry in the sense of gently howling. I am absolutely inconsolable. Nothing, nobody, could ever console me for what has been done; what has been lost; taken away forever by this so-justified action of my parents. I am set to leave, go, do anything, go anywhere: God knows what. The pain is through my whole being, is my whole being. My sister -- even though she was older than me in physical reality, we always have been almost as close as twins -- comes up to me. She tries to reason with me; says it's really not that bad; that I'm exaggerating; mustn't make a fuss; shouldn't be so upset. And to her horror I start to howl out loud. ] howl with primordial pain, grief, rage: the howl of the trees that don't live any more, have been killed. It's the howling of wild nature. But suddenly, or rather gradually, my sister hears the how}, acknowledges it, responds to it. To everyone's civilized horror we howl together. She has heard the call of the trees, the wildness of nature, in and through me. And she has answered. We realize we could possibly be locked away as insane. But we don't care, don't consider. We ourselves are that wildness at last, THE SUNSET WAY 215 again -- beyond reason or reasoning, argument or justification, fear or respectability and social or family ties. They were my beloved trees; my heart. And the lawyer, the assessment man in his shabby coat, had tried to say: "Well, to tell you the truth, I think it's been done very well and looks rather good." As a dream, it shook me to the core. Of course it was telling me some intensely personal things about myself. But even before I had fully awoken I knew that the ancient spirit of this place -- Parmenides' place -- was speaking through it and saying much, much more. On the most obvious level it was simply about the agonizing pain of growing up; about the loss of innocence, of oneness with nature and beauty. Soon we are doing just the same as everybody else: gritting our teeth and getting over it, moving on, learning how to look fondly at all the concrete blocks around us so we can develop an admiring eye for their wonderful storage capacities and insulation. Then, before we know what's happened, we are no longer listening to the lawyer's voice speaking with its constant drone of authority everywhere in the society that surrounds us. We are the lawyer ourselves, because this is what our mind has become. And wherever we look, even inside our most private self, even at spirituality or what feels most sacred, we are quietly assessing everything with the cold calculating eyes of a lawyer in his shabby raincoat: weighing each detail up, converting whatever we once hoped might bring us back to life into another shrewd trick for escaping it. Way beyond even that and behind it all, though, the wild spirit of Velia was blowing through the dream -- the prophetic spirit of our ancestors, the breath of a reality far wiser and more evolved than the supposedly sensible world we stroll around in as would-be adults. 216 PART THREE That reality, forgotten now because it was so neatly chopped down and nicely rationalized long ago, had been and still is a world of laws: true laws, the kind of laws genuinely worthy of a human being. In fact before leaving Velia I was shown those laws one after another, each of them inscribed on its own block of marble, during the course of a dream that lasted the whole night and still continued after I woke up. But there couldn't possibly be any greater distance or difference between those timeless laws and the sliding, makeshift legalities of our shabby lawyers. And gradually I came to realize that this was the real message of the dream. In our society we tend just to see what seems in front of us, no more, because we have been trained to accept it all without question. What we don't understand, though, or even feel any need to understand is where everything comes from. Nothing simply appears out of nowhere; and the lawyer in my dream didn't spring out of nowhere, either. He is nothing but the inescapable consequence of killing off our sacred laws -- of carefully interfering with the gifts which had been brought back from another world. And this applies to all those things we find ourselves surrounded by, whether we think we want them or not. They are just the end product of nature being cut off and destroyed; of a primordial energy being twisted, forcibly diverted from its original course; of manipulating the sacred. We honestly tend to believe nowadays that we can choose to leave the sacred behind, forget about it and get on with living our modern lives. What we have forgotten, though, is that when the sacred is no longer honoured or valued it doesn't go away. It doesn't vanish into some vacuum, some void." The ancient blessings don't just disappear. Instead, the law is for them to turn straight into a curse that chases and hounds us. And perhaps I should give another example of how this works. THE SUNSET WAY 217 Different religions have all sorts of ideas and beliefs about the nature of God. But none of those dogmas or doctrines will ever do anything to change the simplest and most intimately human experience of encountering face to face -- inside a doorway, a kitchen, out in the garden -- the crushing reality that you realize can kill you in an instant. And, once you have glimpsed this, it will never leave you the same again. I am referring to the reality of God as omniscient and omnipresent and omnipotent: as knowing everything because of being everywhere and the power behind the whole of existence. Traditionally there have always been the people who are strong enough to endure such an experience and -- most often as prophets -- play the role of intermediaries between the human and the divine. But this raises a very obvious question. That's the question of what happens when those people fade out of the picture because we no longer care as a culture for any contact with the overwhelming reality of the sacred and because, instead, we suppose we can maintain the laughable illusion of ourselves being the ones in control. The answer is that when we no longer respect or acknowledge the living qualities of divine consciousness and presence and power, they find themselves forced to adapt to our parody of a reality. And they do so by adjusting their shape and form to become the nightmare of a big-brother surveillance state which is blatantly omniscient and omnipresent and omnipotent -- and will be living up to its divine attributes with even greater faithfulness and accuracy during the years to come, all because we thought we could abandon the sacred. Naturally this is no laughing matter. As they say, it's not some ordinary walk in the park. It's a matter of neglecting and misusing divine energy, the most powerful energy there is; and that never ends well. 218 PART THREE Divine laws get twisted into human laws which end up becoming absurdly inhuman. Divine attributes are distorted into mechanisms of human control that become even more inhuman. And it's no coincidence that the most fanatical extremes of legalism, with someone new rushing to sue someone else roughly every second, as well as the most fantastic ingenuity in pushing towards a technological ideal of total global surveillance both have their home in modern America. On the contrary: these straightforward facts spell out the secret of America in its simplest possible form. As a nation it always thought it could claim for itself the mantle, the mystique, of exceptionalism; of being totally unique and different from any other nation on earth. But the United States of America is not exceptional at all, except in one sense -- that it's the perfectly inevitable and unavoidable culmination of the course western culture has been on for thousands of years. Its dreams, its ideals, even its proudest ambitions, are not its own. America's famous manifest destiny is nothing but the end result of the West throwing out what could have been its true destiny. And as for the steady, unconscious descent into technological hell: this is exactly what happens when a society forgets that even its science has a sacred source deep inside the underworld. It's only logical. It's interesting to watch Jung's initial impressions of the United States at the time of his very first visit. The year was 1909 and he was being welcomed as an inter- national celebrity -- encountering even more interest in his work than Freud who had come with him. But when he wrote back to his wife Emma about this "wonderland" he had found himself plunged into, he made a comment of such oracular simplicity that hardly anyone seems to have paid much attention to it: "As far as technological culture is concerned, we lag miles behind America. But all that is frightfully costly and already carries the germ of the end in itself." The prophetic tone of this comment is, just as much as the surgical precision of the warning, unmistakable. It's a world apart, though, from the extravagant prophecies about America's uniquely privileged future that were circulating during, as well as before and after, his lifetime. American occultists pulled back any veil covering the true nature of their country's celebrated exceptionalism when, sometimes with the blessing of presi- dential approval, they revealed how the United States was at last destined to fulfil the ambitious Platonic and Aristotelian dream of seeing an empire ruled by advanced philosopher -- kings. Even the ancient Egyptian priests, people were asked to believe, had already been longing to create this philosophical 220 PART THREE empire in America. The famous golden fleece, searched for by ancient Greek heroes somewhere in the ocean to the west, was really the American Declaration of Independence. And here was the perfect soil for producing the next stage in human evolution: "here was a virgin continent populated only by nomadic Indian tribes, a vast territory suitable in every way for the great human experiment" which simply involves following the "Universal plan" for humanity "until the Platonic empire is established on the earth, and the towers of the new Atlantis rise from the ruins of a materialistic and selfish world."° Most foreign spiritual teachers who came visiting from Asia were understandably stunned by the grandness and beauty, the rawness and undeveloped potency of the land. America was a wonderfully inviting place to create new centres for their work, and it was easy to become almost intoxicated by the country's apparently endless possibilities.' But Jung, to his credit, managed to keep his feet firmly planted on the ground and never forget the realities of human psychology. On a return visit in 1912 he gave an interview to the New York Times which was published under the title: "America facing its most tragic moment". In it he warns, as directly and urgently as possible, about the tremendous danger threatening Americans -- not from outside themselves but from the darkly unconscious forces inside them that they are unwilling or just unable to face. He doesn't only point to the qualities of murderous savagery and cruelty that allowed them to conquer a whole continent with such sophisticated efficiency. Above all he points to the expansive ruthlessness of their reasoning; to the extreme brutality of their coldly abstract logic. He explains as a physician that, although he would be glad to help in the painful process of becoming conscious, there's very little he can do without the full cooperation of the patient. THE SUNSET WAY 221 And this is where the real problem lies. "America does not see that it is in any danger. It does not understand that it is facing its most tragic moment: a moment in which it must make a choice to master its machines or to be devoured by them -- and since it does not know this I would not want to hurt it." Perhaps, because Jung is trying so hard to be tactful as well as truthful, I should emphasize the obvious here. What he found himself warning about was the immediately looming danger of Americans being taken over and destroyed by their machines, their technology, their gadgets -- over a hundred years ago. But even more important is his ominous addition: because the consciousness of Americans "does not know this I would not want to hurt it". Everything, here, has to be read with the greatest scrutiny and care. Jung is very plainly calling attention to a present danger while hinting, just as plainly, that the American psyche not only doesn't know. It doesn't want to know. It doesn't want to wake up; doesn't actually want, in spite of the eager words about transformation, to be transformed. And there is not the slightest good reason why it should. Jung never had any real passion for urging Americans to set off on some grand heroic search so they could discover their higher selves and wake up to their spiritual destiny -- which of course is what most Americans who aren't ruthlessly pursuing material success are already doing in their brutal quest for self- improvement and self-discovery. Instead, they have to discover what they least want to face or confront: the ruthlessness of their mechanical thinking and rationality. Of course it's much easier to export that brutality, or hide it behind a hundred shades of lipstick. But to come face to face with it, directly, is something almost no one is willing to do. Far more attractive is to go on believing what Jung himself refused to believe; to hope optimistically, confidently, desperately 222 PART THREE that if enough people can come together and wake up then all of us will enter a new age. And the entire world will be transformed. It's so much simpler not to notice how every collective move- ment towards raising the awareness of humanity gobbles up what tiny remnant of consciousness people still have only to throw them even deeper into unconsciousness -- or how overwhelmingly tempting it can be, in the intensity of one's enthusiasm, to snatch at the fragments of wisdom intended to offer access to a reality beyond the ego and use them to strengthen the ego instead.° None of this offers any form of a solution. There is no graceful or painless exit into some glamorous new age, even newer than all the other new things Americans already are used to, out of the tragic situation in which America finds itself. And it should be no surprise at all that, when towards the end of his life Jung listed the things he was most afraid of, he chose to mention the ones he did. He was not just afraid of unconsciousness in general. He wasn't only afraid of modern science. In spite of his very genuine fondness for Americans with their remarkable openness and intuitiveness, for American cars, for American slang, he was afraid above all of America. Communism, for him, wasn't anywhere close to being such a threat. Even in a flattening, repressive regime at least a real individuality can survive somewhere underneath the surface. But in a society where every American is mass-educated to turn into an individual, when each single girl and boy is collectively injected with the skills of self-empowerment, then -- in spite of all the song and dance, all the countless choices and therapies, all the magnificent illusions -- deep down inside there is going to be a deadly emptiness.' And then there is the danger of one day having to confront, behind its mask of individualism, the real face of collective THE SUNSET WAY 223 America: an America that crushes human beings underfoot like specks of dirt unless they agree, each single one of them, to pledge themselves to the machine. It was a little over ten years after his 1912 interview with the New York Times that, again, Jung found himself speaking in America about America. This time it was in private, to a special group of people he felt he could trust. And he was talking about the ruthlessness of the American psyche -- as well as about Americans' disrespect, their total disregard, for the "ancestors". To him the two went hand in hand. On one hand ruthless- ness is the inhumanly mechanical, unconscious attitude that stands in the way of any real access to the ancestors. On the other, once we are cut off from our ancestors we are also brutally cut off from ourselves. There was nothing he considered more important. The ancestors, the dead, are the only true source of life in our world of the living. But this fragile world of ours is linked by such an infinitely slender thread with the reality beyond our reality that to block off the realm of ancestors by refusing to value or acknowledge or respect it, as the modern psyche with its ruthless rationality tries to do, is the perfect recipe for disaster. Of course to most people writing nowadays about Jung, in fact even most Jungians, this is little more than words. And that helps to explain why no one has noted how deeply he was influenced, in the things he said about ruthlessness as well as the ancestors on this particular occasion, by Mountain Lake -- the elder he had just met in the New Mexico desert during his first conversation ever with Native Americans.? To be sure, on one level Mountain Lake was only confirming and reinforcing the conclusions Carl Jung had already arrived at by himself. At the same time Jung was doing quite a bit more, 224 PART THREE at this small New York gathering, than talking theoretically about Americans or the unsolved problem of the ancestors still present in their land: much more. To anyone attending the meeting it might have sounded as if he was leading a rather interesting discussion on some somewhat delicate subjects. But the fact is that Jung himself, along with one friend in the audience who just so happened to be the woman responsible for introducing him to Mountain Lake a few days earlier, had an entirely different experience of what was taking place. To him, far from being a simple seminar or lecture, what happened was something quite extraordinary. It was as if he had literally been caught up in performing "a ceremonial for the Dead". And even more striking is his awareness that, in spite of such a carefully controlled environment with its hand-picked participants, the after-effects of this ceremony were on the edge of becoming explosive and evoking what would have been dangerously negative reactions. Obviously one could skate around on the surface just like anybody else; but there were unforeseeable risks involved, even among friends, in engaging on a serious level with the American psyche.' In public, needless to say, it was an altogether different matter. Jung always had at least one eye closely watching the workings of the unconscious, inside himself but also in others, and went out of his way to pay attention to its particular wishes or needs. He was respectfully aware of how distant as well as tenuous the connection tends to be between the egos of Americans and their unconscious shadows, and felt more than a little wary of treading "on the tiger's tail that is the American unconscious". To him it was a part of his duty as a physician only to say what was strictly appropriate or needed on any occasion; and, as a human THE SUNSET WAY 225 being, there might be times when he preferred being just a little economical with the truth." In what's perhaps the most entertaining as well as famous presentation of American psychology that he ever offered an American audience, Jung brought his colourful repertoire of comments and anecdotes to a close by homing in on what he described as the collective attitude of America. And he defined this central characteristic, very simply, as the "heroic ideal" -- the delightfully refreshing can-do mentality already drummed into Americans as children that pushes them on until they drop and tells them everybody has the makings of a hero, the sky is the limit, there is nothing I can't achieve once I set my mind on it." This all sounds absolutely wonderful, provided nobody ever pauses to wonder what such a "heroic ideal" might mean in terms of Jung's psychology as a whole. But the moment one does ask that question, things rather rapidly fall into place. For Jung, when a whole country identifies collectively with the kind of heroic ideal that sets no limit on what its people are able to achieve -- that not only allows but encourages them "heroically to impose their will, have their own way" and cry out loudly "Where there is a will there is a way!" -- everything might look fine for a while on the outside. But inwardly such a country is already in the grip of the same psychological disease, referred to by Jung as the sickness of god-almightiness, that dragged Germany into the First World War before plunging it straight into the ultimate chaos of Fascism and the Nazis.' This is only on the collective level, though. And of course for Jung everything always has to come back to the individual, which explains why he put so much intensity into describing the sphinx's riddle he encountered on his own path into the depths of himself. 226 PART THREE It was a riddle so essential for him as a human to solve, so crucial, that he realized there could be no dodging or escaping it. He was faced with the simplest possible choice. Either he would have to find the answer, whatever it cost him, or he would have to kill himself. And he came to understand that the unbearable question confronting him was the riddle of why he had to kill his own heroic ideal -- why in spite of his overwhelming grief and remorse he was being forced to destroy all those personal qualities he had learned to value most, everything he considered noble and was most attached to, his dominant sense of efficiency and power and force but above all the power of his own intellect. There was no way around it. There is no short cut. All these conscious or unconscious attitudes have to be destroyed and left behind on the path out of unconsciousness into a real consciousness, because even what we proudly think of as our consciousness is only an obstacle. Ideals are the ultimate temptation; and to think I can do what I want is the greatest delusion. "My heroic idealism had to be abandoned, for there are higher things than the ego's will, and to these one must bow."*' Here we end up at the heart of Jung's hard-earned under- standing about what really is involved in coming face to face with the truth of oneself as a human. And to anyone reading what he says about having to abandon one's heroic idealism at all costs, it would be easy enough to suppose this is no more than Jung at his finest -- as well as his most eccentric. This is simply Jung, the questionable psychologist, veering off into the mystical by discussing his own private experience in the vainest of hopes it might have some greater application. Then one would have to think a little deeper. What Jung is trying to convey here might sound strange, rather extreme, certainly quite optional in our modern world -- THE SUNSET WAY 227 especially in the world of modern spirituality with its countless choices and heroic possibilities. But that only goes to show, once again, how far we have drifted away from any trace of collective sanity in the West. Jung in his struggles, his apparently solitary realizations, is not at all alone; far from it. We still have fragments of ancient texts recording the voices of Babylonian wisdom which, thousands of years ago, were saying much the same thing that ancient Greek prophetic tradition would still be saying centuries later. If somebody says "I am a hero" That person will end up humiliated. If someone claims "I can do it!" Then that person will end up a nobody. There is nothing exceptional about this in the least: nothing mysterious or unusual, certainly nothing to feel surprised or troubled or defensive about. On the contrary, this is the most basic reality of human psychology. There are no exceptions at all because the laws -- not the ones made by humans but the laws that make humans -- are quite clear. There never are. And this is simply the voice of wisdom calling out from the dawn, the roots, the source, of our western civilization to that civilization's ultimate manifestation. The wonder is how everything, absolutely everything, anyone can name that makes our so-called civilization unique has a sacred source -- a sacred purpose. The awareness of that sacred purpose, just the simplest act of awareness, is what shapes our culture's sacred geography: is what creates its sacred landscape. And as we lose any sense of that inner landscape inside ourselves we lose, automatically, a sense of the sacredness all around us. When we watch the trees inside us being chopped back and down, let the sacred source of our western world be cut off for any number of extremely sensible reasons, here is where we end up. There is a hidden reality we all share -- in which every slightest thing has its proper place, its beauty, function, integrity. It's the landscape of our own true nature that contains the most detailed instructions and guidance for just what's needed. And the loss of that sacred landscape, which once had been our culture's life force, is the initial ecological disaster from which every other environmental catastrophe outside us follows inevitably: as a matter of course. Now there are all sorts of opportunities for positioning oneself as pro-progress or anti-progress, pro-technology or anti- science. But these imaginary choices are total nonsense. It's utter THE SUNSET WAY 229 futility to be for technology or against it without glimpsing, knowing, understanding what western science was from the very beginning -- a gift offered by the gods with a sacred purpose. Once science has forgotten that purpose, everything is already lost. And this isn't a modern problem at all. Plato as well as Aristotle were already blazing a trail in genetically modifying the seeds of our western culture, stripping them of their natural power, thousands of years ago: squeezing themselves into the picture and taking credit where none was due. That sacred potency refuses to go away, though. It never disappears. If only it had, things might not have turned out quite so bad -- because it stays but changes shape, becomes the power that haunts us by feeding on the chaos, slowly but ever so steadily destroys our world along with us. There is no expert or specialist left who holds the key to western science, or to logic, or to the human mind; let alone to our humble senses. And it's so difficult now to say a word about this, because even the sense of how to listen has been lost. To be sure, we may think we are willing to listen. But as for the genuine willingness to change, rather than just going through the inescapable motions of change, there is far too much already at stake. We have all gone a long way down this road -- have forgotten what it means to want something truly essential for ourselves. It's so much simpler to go on listening to the lawyers outside and inside us, believing in the reasonableness of existence, com- promising here and then there and then back here. And rather than starting to take real responsibility for ourselves, it's far easier picking up the crumbs from under the tables of other cultures: doing a touch of shamanism or Hinduism, a little Zen meditation, a tasty bit of Tibetan Buddhism or an exciting mixture of them all, going away on some vacation before 230 PART THREE coming back again to the brutality of our western society with its normality and triviality as well as the hollow emptiness of its surveillance. Honestly to want to face, then keep facing, the darkness of our western culture -- where we are, are heading, have come from -- one would have to be mad. The funny thing is that here 1 am, waving my hands; making a fuss about the origins and dawn of our western culture, sharing this guarded secret hidden by the West from the West that the West has a sacred source. It can all sound so extraordinary, so strange. But what I am saying is the last thing anybody could actually call extraordinary -- because nowhere on this planet are you going to find one single traditional culture that doesn't remember, down to the finest detail, having its sacred purpose and source. Without even realizing it, we are completely on our own. It was we ourselves who manufactured this peculiar myth called progress, where things are meant to get better. Of course there is no reason at all for bothering about origins when we are sup- posed to be managing so much more effectively, more efficiently, every day. From the first moment a baby becomes able to gurgle, this is what's trumpeted in its ears; and the trouble is that, with our imaginary sense of superiority inside our adult bodies, we never grew beyond the stage of being those little babies. Leaving aside the influence of western civilization, nothing could be more intuitive -- the most natural thing in the world -- than for any culture or tribe that still survives to remember and celebrate its sacred origin. One only has to think of the beautiful saying by Rumi, most famous of Persian Sufis: Look into the source of every skill or invention and There youll find that its root and origin was revelation. Humans learned them all, each single one, from the prophets. THE SUNSET WAY 231 It sounds so nice, so pretty. Not quite so nice, though, is the realization that this applies not only to everyone else: not just to people living in some foreign, exotic country. It also applies to us westerners because, as inheritors from the ancient Greeks, we too have our own prophets -- who were closely connected in their time to the prophets of Israel and the Middle East.!> But to let that fact sink in would really never do, because then we would have to start taking complete responsibility for the secret at the root of our own culture rather than picking away whenever we feel like it at other cultures' fruits. This is why there can be such an excruciating suffering simply in the act of discovering that western civilization, just like any other, came into being out of prophecy; from revelation. It's why there is such a crushing weight of aloneness in holding such a secret, because the price of taking it seriously has become so great. Mostly, the best one can do is watch as the prophecies that gave life to other cultures are puffed up into pretty stories while the prophets who gave their lives for ours go on being taunted and ignored. Historians love nothing more than to jeer at those ancient western prophets, laugh at the extravagant fools they made of themselves, poke fun at Parmenides and Empedocles for their grandiose revelations -- for "condescending to lighten the darkness in which, as they thought, the rest of mankind was stumbling". The fact that these prophetic figures had the apparent arrogance to question our own unquestionable arrogance, that they dared to challenge the integrity of our collective wisdom by claiming we are all asleep and even our fantasies of waking up are just another form of sleep, offers every possible justification for dismissing them as absurdly irrelevant or downright mad while tucking their teachings away inside some drawer." 232 PART THREE And so we manage to forget that traditionally prophets didn't only come with their pressing messages, their edifying recommendations -- which of course everyone is at liberty either to accept or rather reject. They also came to cry. Beyond their attempts to communicate in ways our intelligent minds can at least pretend to make some sense of, they also came to convey the rawest pain of humans' separateness from the sacred. And they cried at people's blank refusal in spite of their solemn pretence, all their vacant piety, to understand -- because, ironically, the anguish in the cry is justified by the response the cry evokes. But, curiously, Carl Jung didn't forget. On the contrary: he knew that cry only too well. It was what kept pushing him on against the odds, regardless of all the opposition and misunderstanding. He was familiar with it through the teachings of the notorious Gnostic prophet and saviour, Mani, whose final shriek or cry will announce the ending of the whole world. Above all, though, he knew it as the famous "cry of Merlin". This is the cry not just of Merlin the magician but of Merlin the great prophet who, Jung came to realize, contains inside himself the essential secret and central significance of the Grail; who ends up, in spite of all his magic, being inwardly forced to give up on people because their stupidity causes him so much suffering they make him mad; the same Merlin who finally withdraws from the world into the silence of the forest and, a bird himself, can only be heard through his cry which is no different from the crying of the birds. And during his last years Jung had the shock of his life when he suddenly realized that, through withdrawing more and more into his tower by the lake at Bollingen, he had been living the legend of Merlin down even to the smallest details. THE SUNSET WAY 233 He was Merlin. The whole of his work, everything he ever published, was that ancient prophetic cry. And, exactly like Merlin, he was doomed never to be understood by humans." After all, if humans don't know how to decipher the crying of the birds it's not very likely they will be able to understand the cries of Carl Jung. There is something about the dream I had at Velia that took me a long time to start to understand. It had to do with the howl that came out of me, louder and then louder, before spreading to my sister. I am not saying I didn't intuit immediately in the rawness of my own direct experience what this is -- because even while I was still asleep I did. It's the shrieking of animals, the wailing and crying of birds, shockingly articulated through a human. It's the sound of the sacred shouting to itself; the voice of life welling up inside us that denies the rightness of everything wrong outside us. It's the only response strong enough, primordial enough, to take a stand when even our most meditative versions of tranquil- lity have become nothing but the subtlest forms of complicity. It's the roaring stream of endless emotion flowing below all our reasonableness and respectableness -- way underneath our tidy and nicely domesticated spiritual paths -- that we have no end of trouble reconciling ourselves with, that we don't even have the agility to let ourselves hear. It's the unbearable awareness that none of our clever strategies is ever going to work because they only make things worse, carefully layering more levels of illusion on top of every other illusion. It's the call bursting out from one's depths that has no self- conscious purpose; no stated or unstated motive; no wise wish or THE SUNSET WAY 235 hope to change, improve, bring about some better understanding. And it's not just the pain at the loss of our inner nature, or the grief at remembering what we've lost. It's also what makes that nature alive again. It's what Jung so perfectly described as nature's outrage against all the ruthless artificialities and sophisticated rationalities trying to crush her. And in terms of our own western culture nothing could possibly be less reasonable. Nothing could be less justifiable or acceptable, less appropriate or tolerable. On the contrary, to howl is utter madness because it's the one and only thing that cuts straight through our shabby little fittingnesses until there is nothing left that fits. But what took me so long to realize was that -- although it can feel the loneliest thing on earth to do -- in being shown how to howl on that cold night at Velia I couldn't have been further from alone. Instead, I had just been introduced to the reality of the prophets. We do a fine job, the most splendid one imaginable, of forgetting. It wasn't at all easy to erase the awkward truth that Hebrew prophets were constantly howling and, what's even worse, had come to instruct others in how to howl. Greek prophets, too, like Empedocles: they howled, they wailed. The cities of Mesopotamia which kept such close ties to Hebrew traditions and the Hebrew language had their own name for one particular kind of prophet. It meant "wailer" or "howler". And when ancient Greeks came into contact, as they most definitely did, with shamans bringing their wisdom and power from Central Asia they used just a single word to describe them. They called them goés, which means the "howler". Shamans and healers and prophets, Hebrew prophets, Greek prophets, Babylonian prophets: they all used to be howlers. Often "howler" was the only title or name they were known by. And they happen to have far more in common than meets the eye. 236 PART THREE Whatever the occasion, regardless of the reason why they seemed to be howling, they were howling for the sake of the dead. They howled over the death of individuals, of a people; of a culture, of humanity. They would howl for all those who imagine they are still alive -- but are already dead too. Prophets are never just talking to someone over there, or me, or you. They are prophets because they howl to the whole world. Even if the words they're made to speak are for one audience only, their howling has no limits. It's heard by people; it's heard by nature. It wakes the living. It stirs the dead. This is all a little bit too big for most of us, though. So we cut out the howl and ignore it; turn prophets into preachers and reformers and the kind of petty moralizers we can so easily relate to; reshape them in our image, bend their figure to our will, reinvent them as nothing but reflections of our own egoic ambitions. And of course we love to suppose that the one and only thing they are concerned about is reaching us -- although we'll make sure to move heaven and earth to prevent them coming anywhere near us. It can sound grating but ever so amusing when our politicians and forecasters and gurus set themselves up as prophets, pose as prophets, do business as prophets; and we wrongly assume this is what prophets always used to do. We can't even grasp the simple fact that whatever egos those people once had were ground into the earth. Real prophets are never proud of being prophets because they are too busy being bent over sideways by the weight of our unconsciousness together with the overwhelming vision of our past, where we are headed, what we've become. Most of them, and not just Jonah, would beg to be freed from the need to say or do anything. They fight their role as much as they can. They would run from it if they could." THE SUNSET WAY 237 It may seem strange, very strange, that to return to the beginnings of western philosophy could bring us not to the beauties and clarities of abstract thinking. It brings us to this: to the sheer horror of what we have forgotten and collectively agree to go on forgetting for the common good. And underneath all the new-age platitudes being politely piled nowadays a mile high above the centuries of Christian platitudes, the pulsing heart of religion is what it always has been -- the howl. Don't think you will ever arrive at any real stillness except through the howl; and don't imagine there is any hearing the howling of the cosmos without sinking into the deepest possible stillness. The prophets howl to knock down the cardboard of our reasoning, howl at the damage we can't help inflicting on our- selves and the world around us, howl to give a voice to the sadnesses and depressions of a whole culture that everyone else has been left either to suffer or exploit in silence. They howl at the eternal inconsolableness buried under all the brutal consolations offered by religion, philosophy, spirituality. They howl at the pointlessness of waking people up just so they can watch them fall straight asleep again, howl at the utter futility of even hoping to make anyone understand. And they howl, not because nobody understands but because no one can tolerate their howl. After all: there is not the slightest reason why anyone in her or his right mind would want to hear it, let alone listen to what lies behind it, because the sound of that cry turns one's whole life upside down."° This explains why, over the centuries, it came to be agreed that the most sensible thing possible is not just to silence the howl. A much more effective solution, not to mention far more economical, is simply to get rid of prophecy instead. 238 PART THREE And so the history of the West, along with the Middle East, turned into a tedious story of drowning prophecy in mockery and streams of meaningless words. It was systematically silenced in Greece; neatly finished off in Judaism, too; banished as much as possible from Christianity; and removed, most elegantly of all, from Islam thanks to the dogma of Muhammad as the final prophet." There is always the little trick, though, that those who think they have everything under control try to pretend they can forget. We may be ruthless enough to destroy ourselves, but we just don't have the ability to cut off the root of prophecy. And the moment people finally fancy they got rid of it, that's when they are likely to discover it hadn't disappeared at all. It was simply driven underground. In other words it went where it belonged, went where reason so desperately wants and needs it to stay: hopefully safe and sealed off in the mental asylum. This is how the lineage of ancient prophets ended up passing, as it were, through Allen Ginsberg in the 1950s. He started working at his poem called "Howl" during 1954. Its very first line announces that it will be all about madness -- and eventually leads through to the final chorus "I'm with you in Rockland", roaring with Ginsberg's undying sympathy and empathy for the mental patients at the notorious Rockland State Hospital near New York. So we have a specific year: 1954. We have a particular place: Rockland State Hospital. And very soon we'll see how uncanny these stories of madness can really be with their sweet irony; with their strange exactness of detail that somehow no amount of reasoning can ever match. Ginsberg, himself, was no stranger to mental hospitals. He would later describe how the howling enshrined in his title was THE SUNSET WAY 239 inspired by the poetic, ecstatic cries he heard inside an asylum. But, for him, that's not where the real madness lies. Seen through his eyes the entire world has gone mad. The whole of western culture is insane, which is exactly why it needs to lock up the only ones who are sane: who have managed to glimpse what we really are, where we have come from, where we are going. And to him that madness was, above all, the mechanical insanity of America. It was the sanctified monstrosity of robotic efficiency methodically exuded from Reason -- the same machine- like reasoning that makes even the gentlest, most sensitive people crazy. But of course it's never easy for anyone, whether Ginsberg or Jung, to say such things; and it's no big surprise that he faced quite some challenges in saying them." Through his own lengthy process of trial and error Ginsberg would eventually find there was only one way for him to portray this collective insanity, convey it ina medium that would keep its terrifying actuality alive. That wasn't through ordinary poems but through poetry envisioned, very consciously, as a work of magic: as a deliberate act of healing, a science of incantation and repetition based on the pattern and rhythm of breathing. In other words he spontaneously, naturally, found his way back to the poetry of the old Greek prophet -- healers who once helped to give birth to our western world." But that's not to say he didn't have his own very particular sources of inspiration. Night and day he immersed himself in the world of the Old Testament prophets. As well as hearing the howling with his own ears inside the madhouse, he saw it preserved in writing across the centuries by Hebrew prophets. He found the beat and metre he used, his incantatory and hypnotic style, already present in the rhythmic language of Hebrew prophecy. 240 PART THREE Even inside a federal court of law he was presented, and defended, as a Hebrew prophet. He cried and howled over the fate of everyone around him like the Hebrew prophets. He, too, had overpowering visions that forced him to talk about the past and present realities people in their "drear consciousness" are chronically incapable of seeing -- not to mention about America's demise. Just like the Hebrew prophets he understood that there is no escaping into God to get away from all the destruction here, because God is the destruction. And like them he appreciated that having to play the role of a prophet isn't some egoic satisfaction or glorious honour. On the contrary, it's a "terrible fucking situation to be confronted with". But even prophecy has its tender compensations. And in the outer world Allen Ginsberg became aware of one reality that, through its infinite delicateness, brings with it "the prophetic image beyond our present strength of flesh to bear". This is the reality of birds -- above all when they fly down. That's when they have the power to transfigure time, almost destroy it, as suddenly they embody the simple presence of the prophetic word. Whether we notice them or not, they are always here; now. They are never gone for long while we are alive. And they will be there at our graves to swoop and cry and mourn for us -- shrieking and calling and remembering God's name, the God we kept forgetting to care about, when we are gone." One of the finest prophetic howls dates back a long time: close to three thousand years. The Hebrew prophet Micah perfectly manages to sum up the prophet's role by bringing everything back to its barest basics. Iwill wail and howl. I will go stripped and naked. I will howl like a jackal and wail like an owl. And there is something here in the comparison with owls and jackals that -- thanks to the miracle of erudition -- every biblical scholar and translator and commentator manages to slide over because it's so downright simple, so totally irreducible to anything else.*° In wailing like an owl and howling like a jackal, the prophet is crying with the voice of nature. Or to say it another way: a prophet is the purest, rawest nature talking and calling as a human. That's likely to sound, to us sophisticated westerners, the ultimate in absurdity. We mostly tend to think of prophets as piti- ful, almost ridiculous figures -- utterly unnatural, otherworldly, twisted, crabbed. But this is just the result of all our unnatural, 242 PART THREE otherworldly, crabby, twisted conditioning reversing the truth completely and blinding us to what each of us needs to see. From beginning to end, prophecy is simply about what's natural. As a matter of fact nothing in our human experience could be more natural because the reality of prophecy is all about the nature, inner and outer, we left behind. And the one thing we somehow manage to miss is that, above everything else, it's about life. As a culture we are collectively quite happy pretending to show a bit of respect for prophecy while continuing to mock it and prostitute it, attack it, commodify it. But that's exactly what we do to nature. And we do it because we forgot, long ago, that prophets are the guardians of creation. They are the preservers and protectors of life. This is why it's always prophets who, in sacred traditions, know the language of the birds. And they don't just understand it. They know, the same as shamans, how to speak it -- how to talk and call and cry along with the birds. Inside their prophetic bones they carry the memory of older days when birds and animals and humans all spoke the same language; when humans could turn into birds and birds would change into humans. But they don't only remember those days. They bring them back to life again. These were the most ancient forms of prophecy in the West: watching the swooping of birds, constantly listening to their sounds, paying attention to the meaning of the breeze stirring the leaves in the trees. Everything works perfectly together. Hearing what the birds say leads, automatically, into deciphering the message of the breeze. And it's the same story in Jewish tradition, as well as Islam. When the prophet Solomon became king he was able "to THE SUNSET WAY 243 rely on the birds and the winds to rule wisely'" -- because as soon as he learned the language spoken by the birds they explained to him, straight away, the language of the winds. This is what it is not just to live in nature, or work with it, or enjoy it, or do one's noble and sentimental best as a human to protect it. This is what it is to be a part of nature; to see and hear with nature's own ears and eyes; to speak out with nature's crackling, cackling voice.?' But -- and there aren't many bigger buts -- most of these legends about birds communicating with humans are placed in another time, another age, for a reason. We have come a long, tortuous way from any naturalness since then. And whoever feels moved nowadays to cry out how marvellous this mythical material all sounds, how romantic, no longer has any idea of what's actually involved because to hear a bird speaking and also understand it isn't going to be nice or lovely at all. Instead, it's likely to be one of the most terrifying shocks in a person's life. To get a genuine feel for where we are now, some true sense of what's happened, we have to get back down on solid ground and turn around to face the past. And it will be enough just to start by looking back to Porphyry -- the chatty Platonist who fondly enjoyed writing obituaries for oracles and was so pleased with his reasoning he didn't even notice, except perhaps in a moment of depression, how his own talkativeness was contributing to the end of anything real. There is one rather interesting place where he finds himself speaking quite openly about ancient myths, even recent stories, of people being allowed to understand the language of the birds. But then -- in a sudden bout of self-consciousness -- he remembers what it means to be a civilized, intelligent human 244 PART THREE being. "Let's leave those things aside and be done with them", he writes, "because of our natural, inborn inclination to disbelieve." And this was closing in on eighteen hundred years ago. Even back then, nothing could be more "natural" than to disbelieve in what's most natural. Already then the innate naturalness of understanding nature's language was something to dismiss as embarrassingly unnatural because the unnaturalness of disbelieving in our naturalness had become our second nature. Of course, in saying this, Porphyry was dutifully doing his job as a faithful Platonist. After all, it was Plato himself who hundreds of years earlier had brought up the old myth of a golden age -- when humans could talk the same language as any animal -- just so he could ask a clever question. Was humanity better off then, or are we better off in our modern society now? And his ironic, abrasive answer could well prove one of the dumbest statements ever made in history. The whole question boils down, he says, to whether the people of that age used their familiarity with the language of animals to engage them at length in rational discussions about philosophy. If they did, he explains, they were better off; if not, not. But until someone comes along with a reliable account of exactly what discussions humans used to have with the animals and birds back then, "let's leave those things aside and be done with them." It might seem incredible that intelligent people over the centuries have taken this pretentious silliness seriously. But really it's quite understandable -- because we have nothing else left. Living on the surface of ourselves, all we have is these clevernesses to give us some sense of self-value or worth; and very few of us will feel comfortable hearing a prophetic voice like William Blake's express anything near the full depth of fury at Plato's "pompous ignorance" that the philosopher, for all his apparent wisdom, so amply deserves."* THE SUNSET WAY 245 To put those things aside and be done with them: that's exactly what we did. And what happened over the past two thousand years -- the silencing of nature, the mutilating of a whole culture -- has been far more thorough than we can guess. This is why even many of the greatest modern sages, experts on spirituality, authorities in the esoteric, manage to stamp out the power of nature precisely when they seem to be doing the opposite. We only have to look at the best known of the so- called Traditionalists, René Guénon, and the way he opens his famous treatise about "The Language of the Birds": "The expression is clearly a symbolic one, since the very importance that is attached to the knowledge of the language -- it is considered to be the prerogative of a high initiation -- precludes a literal interpretation." In other words, heaven forbid that such a mysterious language involving such a high initiation would have anything to do with dirty physical birds. Far from it: the "birds" here don't refer to birds at all. Instead they "symbolize the angels, who precisely stand for the higher states of being." As for all those fluffy creatures we can notice flitting outside our window and even, if we are able to stop our constant thinking long enough, hear when we step out for a breath of fresh air -- we would be wise to leave those things aside and be done with them while, in the top-heavy fantasies of our intellect, imagining we can communicate straight with the world of angels." That's not the way it ever worked, though, or ever will. Learning the language of the birds is done just as the prophets do: out in the open, crying and calling with longing from the depths of one's belly, crawling with clawed feet along the earth while eyeing every single detail, because it's the birds chanting and howling around us that have the power to snatch us out of our reasoning minds into eternity. 246 PART THREE Finding people who are able to explain this isn't easy. In fact everything else about our lifeless world seems to deserve explaining -- aside from this. But it's possible. And I will just quote a few sentences from my friend Stéphane Ruspoli, who was also a close friend of Henry Corbin until the day Corbin died, where he describes the personal experiences recorded by the great Persian Sufi Najm al -- ~Din Kubra. "Kubra begins with these striking words of praise: 'Glory be to God who has taught us the language of the birds.' And his masterpiece of mystical theology goes on to offer the most extraordinary details about asceticism, about withdrawing into retreat from the world -- as well as about the practice of dhikr, or prayer of the heart, which Kubra connects directly with the crying and moaning of birds. "And here is one particularly impressive passage about the 'spontaneous cry' that bursts from the heart of lovers when they become one with God through invoking his supreme name: "The wailing and moaning of lovers keeps growing stronger with every single mouthful as they drink to the full from the cup of sadness and quench their thirst -- eventually getting used to it and finding the greatest pleasure in its taste. Then the cry they utter, quite involuntarily, becomes a natural expression of coming closer and closer to God: the Beloved. "Just as all the sounds emerging out of a bird's throat stem from a groaning deep down inside its entrails, in exactly the same way pilgrims too reach a particular state of mystical emotion where bird cries start escaping from them. This is the result of so much inner pressure being released. It's the result of their familiarity with God. It's a result of the joy that this familiarity brings them'." Then Kubra goes on to explain how all this started becoming real for him. THE SUNSET WAY 247 "I heard these cries when I encountered a dervish, emptied of everything except for God, along the road. What he was doing met with my strong disapproval. I questioned him about it and he answered: 'It's all for the good if God so wishes, and nothing but a blessing.' He didn't go into any more details because in his clairvoyance he saw that I hadn't yet attained the appropriate station. "But later -- when the time came for me, too, to reach this station and experience for myself the extreme power of bird cries -- I at last understood that the crying of a dervish is, indeed, really a cry. "And I chewed and bit my fingertips in remorse. And I praised the glory of God just like someone who has been over- come by amazement; who is dumbfounded, stunned." Here, right from the start, Kubra does nothing to make matters smooth or tidy or easy. On the contrary, even with his opening praise of God "who has taught us the language of the birds" he is simply speaking the truth in the deepest possible sense straight as he experiences it -- flouting the conventions of Islam, breaking one of its greatest taboos in presenting himself as a prophet. But what he says has nothing to do with prim or proper fantasies about prophets and angels. It's not some sweet, otherworldly experience because it's quite literally something that grabs you by the entrails. And it should be no surprise at all to read what Kubra goes on to add -- right after describing that state of wildly crying like a bird which he, as well as the dervish he'd met, both found themselves overpowered by. "Those are the times when everyone, except for the rare individual who knows and understands, will assume you have gone mad." You may well suppose that -- with so much talk about madness and prophets, language of winds and language of birds -- I have completely lost my bearings. That would be reasonable enough; but the fact is that I am intimately familiar with every inch of this route. I know exactly where these access corridors lead because they are the back entrance to something you will never be able to make any sense of by approaching, the way people so often want to do, from the front. If you were to look honestly at the hypocrisy behind the pious enshrining of prophetic books in the Jewish and Christian bibles, you would have to laugh. Embalmed, preferably unread, in sacred text they are safe enough. But if you were to encounter the reality of the prophets: God help you. Hebrew prophets, just like Greek prophets, already knew from the very start all the absurdities and impossibilities they were meant to contend with. And the truth is that it wasn't enough for one religion or culture after another to silence prophecy by attempting to cut it off at the source. That was fair enough, as far as it went -- one more technique for trying to insulate ourselves from those who warn and howl and cry. THE SUNSET WAY 249 But the single defence against prophecy which, over the centuries, proved far more effective than any other has been the accusation of madness. It can be quite surprising to realize that, already in their own time, the sanctified Hebrew prophets were being mocked and dismissed as insane. They certainly weren't alone, though. Greeks and Romans, too, almost made a business of dismiss- ing their own prophets as mad. And this intimate habit of closely associating the prophet -- whose job it was to bring a little sanity and balance back into the world -- with insanity still clings tight to the roots of western culture.*" Along with the evolution of psychology as a fledgling discipline in the nineteenth century came the urgent need, interestingly, not to change any of these assumptions or associations but just to create an updated language for them instead. Learned experiments got underway and soon experts were playing with impressive-sounding terms, like hysterical catalepsy, to account for the peculiar forms of insanity supposedly so characteristic of prophets. It was only during the twentieth century, though, that the real industry of diagnosing prophecy began kicking into action. Streams of scientific expressions started flooding the literature and manuals and textbooks. There was "psychosis", there was "schizophrenia", not to mention the ever-popular label of "pathology"; and, to lend an extra flourish, "paranoid schizophrenia" was added as well. Of course nothing betrayed the illness, the trauma, the psychosis of prophets more obviously than their howling. The trouble is that, logically, this might mean wolves and jackals and coyotes are all in pressing need of treatment -- while Native Americans performing their sacred ceremonies must be crying out for medication. But it's best not to be too logical. After all, 250 PART THREE we are only dealing with madness: finding the right-sounding label is the thing that counts. And it didn't take too long before even those flimsy scientific labels were sounding a little out of date. So, almost as if to honour the new millennium, psychologists as well as biblical scholars hatched an even better language for explaining prophecy away. With the help of the American Psychiatric Association they found the perfect term for a fresh generation. Those tragically unfortunate ancient prophets had been suffering all along, un- diagnosed, from "post-traumatic stress disorder". There is one specific feature well worth noting in this steady march of progress: how quick and eager modern Jungian writers tend to be to fall obediently into step, in particular across North America. As a matter of fact there are those who have been extremely happy making the most gracious contributions of their own -- citing Jonah, for example, asa classic case of obsessive-compulsive disorder or oppositional defiant disorder." But in contributing their own pathologies to the psychological interpretation of prophecy, Jungian authorities went a great deal further than that. One only has to look at the case of a very dynamic and highly reputed Jungian practitioner, James Kirsch, who for years maintained a close professional relationship with Jung himself. In fact his position on the matter, stated with the unmistakable certainty of religious dogma, could hardly have been clearer. Would-be prophets, he explained, are guilty of the most fundamental misunderstanding, Anyone throughout the last two thousand years who made the grave mistake of stepping into the shoes of prophecy was heading straight for psychosis, paranoia, schizophrenia, insanity, catastrophe. And the single greatest tragedy is that all those figures who so sadly either almost fell, THE SUNSET WAY 251 or did fall, into a massive psychological inflation by imagining they could act out the role of prophet were never even aware of the fact they had been born too early. It was absolutely unavoidable that they would just become helpless "victims" of the process of individuation, rather than conscious participants in it, because each of them happened to be living "before the time was ready". They were unfortunate enough to have lived before Dr. Jung came into the world -- before the decisive turning point in history when his psychology was created to help them, to save all the would-be saviours by saving them from themselves. Of course the irony is that the real person suffering from a state of inflatedness here is the faithful Jungian who wrote such statements and so fervently believed them. But there is a still greater irony in the fact that Jung himself, even up until the year before he died, didn't stop warning this man as forcefully as he could: kept trying to make him realize the massive psycho- logical inflation he had become a victim of through identifying so closely, so ruinously, with Jung's own work and psychology.** Words falter here, come to a stop, turn around and back on themselves because it's not just ideas or theories that are on the line. It's people's lives, as well -- the lives of prophets, of therapists, and above all of the so-called ordinary people caught in between. And if you were to suspect this isn't the end of the story you would be right, because there is the other case I would be very glad to step around if I only could. That's the case of Edward Edinger. Edinger has come to be described as the single most influential Jungian in America during the second half of the twentieth century -- not to mention the finest spokesperson for Jung himself that North America has had the good fortune to know. He never met him; had no personal contact with him. But it was the man's ideas that captured him. 252 PART THREE Soon he was completely convinced that Jung's psychology offered a new, post-Christian path of salvation. He also felt sure Jung was the most important person who had walked the earth since Jesus Christ, a relatively tame belief compared to the claims of other Jungians. And in the humblest contrast Edinger saw himself as a perfectly modest, utterly ordinary missionary dedicated to spreading the wisdom of an extraordinarily magnificent master: always a truly terrifying combination. In other words, everything that Jung throughout his life had strained to keep out of public view and away especially from his own eyes was all of a sudden being put on grand display by this self-effacing disciple for the whole world to be able to see. But it's not his views and theories that interest me, or his unwrapping of Jung's ideas while often managing to turn them discreetly inside out, or his rather mediocre erudition. What concerns me is Edinger's actions; what he did. Quite late in his life he gave a series of lectures about prophecy. And rather predictably, in tune with the spirit of the times he lived in, he came to explain that the whole business of being a prophet was sheer psychosis from beginning to end. But, in his particular case, this made him start fondly reminiscing about an incident that happened when he was still a young man. At the time of that incident he was working as a psychiatrist in a mental hospital near New York. He had also been immersed, as a patient, in Jungian analysis for several years. But far more significant than the relative newness to him of Jung's psychology at that earlier point in his career is the undisguised pride, the total lack of reflexivity or self-questioning, with which as a venerable teacher and authority in his sixties he still derives pleasure from reliving the details of what he had done. THE SUNSET WAY 253 And for those details he mentions a specific year: 1954. And he also mentions a particular place: Rockland State Hospital.» "Indeed", he explains, "the whole archetype of the prophet is acommon content of the psychoses. I can give you a personal example of that. This comes from a patient I saw when I was working at Rockland State Hospital many years ago, in 1954 as a matter of fact. Here is the way I described the patient upon admission. ""Twenty-four-year-old slender blond man. He was a minister. I'he story was that his difficulties began about three weeks ago when he was serving as a minister for three rural churches in upstate New York. At this time he began hearing auditory hallucinations of God, telling him that he was the Messiah, the second coming of Christ. He states that he fought against this message and carried on conversations with God, insisting that this could not be. God, however, told him that at the very least he must take this information to the churches and convey it to them. And while describing this he is rather apologetic and sheepish, knowing perfectly well that this is an insane idea." With mounting condescension Edinger takes a moment to document this twenty-four-year-old's doubts, his conflicts, his uncertainties -- as well as the strikingly thoughtful ways in which he was trying to explain his own situation to himself. And with the magnificent arrogance of a man who thinks he knows everything but perhaps knows nothing, who doesn't even pause to consider how desperate the young minister must have been to find some way back to the freedom of nature, impatiently he goes straight on to explain: "Well, he wasn't really as good as this sounds. He was delusional and assaultive, so he had to be confined on the violent ward. I made a record some days later from that ward: 254 PART THREE "He is quite confused in thinking, still receiving messages from God that he is the second coming of Christ. Sometimes he wants to march out of the hospital and start preaching the message. I'he messages come from the wind and from the birds when they fly down and flutter their feathers ..."" "That's an example", as our doctor expertly sums up the whole case, "of being overcome by the prophet archetype and falling into an overt psychosis." It's rather hard to believe that Edward Edinger, a well- read man, had no knowledge of the fact that observing and listening to the wind and the birds was the cornerstone of ancient prophecy -- or that those who knew how to hear as well as see the messages contained in the sounds of the wind and the movement of birds were once considered the closest of people to the divine. But the question is not whether, as a matter of intellectual book knowledge, he was aware of this or not. The only question is why on earth, whether as a young doctor or a much older lecturer, he should ever care. For any psychologist, even any orthodox Jungian, prophecy is the last possible thing to entertain as something serious. And in the case of Edinger we can glimpse just what this means: can see how literally he took his conviction that prophecy is never an issue to be taken literally. As soon as he has finished revisiting those old case records from Rockland, he goes straight on to compare his blond minister with the ancient prophet Jeremiah point by point. Jeremiah and the minister not only were exactly the same in imagining they were prophets. They even shared the identical doubts and conflicts; struggles and fears. But above all they both made the same fatal mistake of acting out the role of prophet, because that's the purest psychosis. "Then one is crazy". THE SUNSET WAY 255 In other words, with all his learned lecturing and writing about the prophets, Edinger himself "wasn't really as good as this sounds" -- because if he had come across Jeremiah he would have done his job without a moment's thought and locked him up in Rockland, too. And naturally he had to. There is nobody alive who wants to be challenged by the reality, as opposed to the fakery, of prophecy. No one in any truly civilized culture can be expected to tolerate the brutal violence of a man who hears the sacred speaking in the breeze or in the gentle fluttering of a bird's wings as it flies low and close to the ground. Edinger has a fascinating passage about just how bad being a prophet is for one's social life. He notes how bitterly Jeremiah complained about his harmonious relationship to other people being destroyed when he came bringing messages from another world; how he was locked up and humiliated in public for howling. "Even at the very best, even at the most careful, it can be very dangerous to be a prophet -- if one tells all that one sees or intuits." And so only fools would say what they intuit or see. He even, along with other Jungians, leans ona false etymology of the word "prophet" so he can pretend that the true job of someone like Jeremiah should have been "to adapt his message, to mediate it to the psychological reality of those he is talking to". Otherwise, everything goes wrong. "He loses his relatedness to other people; he fails to take into account their reality." The simple truth is, though, that the meaning of the ancient word "prophet" has nothing whatsoever to do with adapting one's message to a human audience. The word means "to speak on behalf of" the divine. It means just to serve as a mouthpiece: to say whatever the sacred is needing to say.°° And one can talk until the cows come home about prophets failing to take into account everybody's reality. But then who, 256 PART THREE aside from prophets, is going to talk about everyone failing to take into account the divine reality? Instead we go on living out our therapeutically self-serving lives, assured that whoever threatens to disturb us will get whatever's coming to them: be labelled appropriately, put away. And so there is no one brave enough left even to ask about the collective craziness -- the total psychosis -- of a world that has silenced its prophets. So we come back at last to Jung. If one stops just to look and listen, it can be remarkable to note what starts quietly stepping out from the shadows -- because while still alive he was surrounded on every side by voices accusing him, reprimanding him, mocking him for wanting to be a prophet. But these weren't only the voices of fools. Included among them was the voice of his old friend and colleague Sigmund Freud who at times also had the nerve to describe him as a mystic, not to mention crazy. And, even more strikingly, some of them were the voices crying out inside Jung himself: taunting, tormenting, torturing him. There is nothing here to worry about, though; nothing at all. The most devoted of Jungians, those people who happened to be closest to him, were of a single mind and voice in rejecting the slightest murmur of any nonsense about him being a prophet. The same goes for the best and finest minds, apparently, in the world of Jungian scholarship. It's all such a silly mistake: the crudest of misunderstandings. There is nothing to see here, not a single doubt to linger on; the facts of the matter couldn't be simpler; the case is closed. 258 PART THREE And anyone stubborn enough still to feel unsatisfied by these collective assurances is sooner or later going to be faced with something far more decisive -- Jung's own unfailing habit of stridently insisting, time and time and then time again, that he wasn't a prophet. The case is not just closed. It's already sealed and disposed of. 37 The trouble here, the awkward little problem we are so quick to overlook, is that in reality things rarely are quite so simple. As the saying goes: where there's smoke there is often fire, and if you notice dentists rushing around intensely denying they are astronauts you are bound to ask the reason why. Also, there is the need for a healthy dose or two of common sense. It can be interesting to watch how, whenever Jung raised the question of whether Freud deserved the title of prophet, he would innocently use the term as an expression of praise. But when Freud, or others, raised the spectre of Jung wanting to become a prophet there was nothing nice intended at all. And why, with this word being bandied around as a term of such outright mockery or abuse, Jung would have cared to add to his troubles by heaping such an obvious insult on his own head is beyond any sane person's understanding. Add to this the fact that he very shrewdly used to note how any "real prophet or saviour" who decided to go public would be destroyed by our modern world of television and media within a few short weeks, and one can appreciate why even if Jung knew he was a prophet he would have been the last person ever to admit it.*° Then, of course, there is that matter of his constant denials which any number of people have been gullible enough to point to as the ultimate criterion of truth. But we have already seen more than enough examples of his public denials -- Jung the THE SUNSET WAY 259 Gnostic denying he is a Gnostic, Jung the mystic insisting he is not a mystic, Jung the magician waving his wand and solemnly declaring he is no magician -- to get a visceral sense of exactly what he meant by "concealing one's vestiges". I do appreciate, though, that this can all be a little hard to accept. And so, if it still seems difficult really to believe that he could have condoned the blatant act of saying things which are downright deceitful or false, I will just mention one other passage which should put everybody's doubts to rest. In those green and innocent days when he hadn't yet learned the full price that has to be paid for openly revealing one's enthusiasms, Jung gave Freud quite a shock by telling him their new psychology of the unconscious was a religion: in fact was destined to be the new religion, even complete with its own saviour probably waiting somewhere in the wings. But soon he would also be offering Freud a warning. Especially among friends or colleagues, he explained, one has to be careful. All the gossip, the backbiting, the murmurs of rebellion are nothing but normal reactions to something that behaves and performs and looks just like a religion. So we have to take the necessary steps to model ourselves on the esoteric traditions of antiquity. Concealment is the key. Our psychology will only grow and thrive inside the atmosphere of a secret religious conclave that meets in private, behind closed doors. What's more, though, we need to make sure to protect all this from our own impatient ambitions to go public with everything we have discovered -- because our psychology "is much too true to be acknowledged or recognized, yet, in public. First and foremost, this is what we have to do: we have to restrict ourselves to handing out masses of falsified, adulterated extracts and passing round nothing but watered- down versions of it." 260 PART THREE And if you plan on looking the passage up inside the authorized English translation of Jung's letters to Freud, you may as well give up because all you will find is a crudely diluted and falsified version of what Jung once wrote.°? So perhaps, as most people do, you too enjoy your own drinks adulterated; completely watered down. And there is nothing wrong with that at all. But if you happen not to, and have a strong enough longing for the truth as well as the internal fortitude to handle it, then it might be time to think twice before swallowing the masses of palatable denials that Jung was a prophet -- and look, instead, at what he actually said about the subject of prophecy when he chose to touch on it. The obvious place to start is with a piece he once wrote which very understandably, because it seems to come so close to mapping the unmappable territory of the psyche, has almost assumed the status of an introductory textbook for Jungian psychology. The original version dates back to 1916, when he was still struggling intensely to come to terms with the experiences documented by his Red book. In it he directly takes aim at the ambitiousness of people who are so weak-minded they give way to the temptation of believing they are prophets. Then he ends with an even more pointed comment about the danger of "setting oneself up" as a prophet: of rushing to become a missionary to others rather than quietly watching over oneself, silently integrating one's psychological discoveries into ordinary everyday life. And, now that the Red book has been published, nothing could be plainer than the full extent to which these general warnings are based on Jung's very personal struggles and bitter experiences at the time -- while he was battling in private with what he specifically describes as his own prophetic ambition, THE SUNSET WAY 261 fighting against the almost overwhelming temptation to accept the role of prophet for himself.*° But twelve years later, with the even greater experience of a man in his fifties, he went back to his original text and rewrote it. In addition to his initial warning about ambition and temptation, which he left intact, he included a whole new section on prophecy and the problem of inflation. And to judge from those who for the better part of a century have been either loudly insisting or at least silently implying that according to Jung prophecy is the direct equivalent of inflation and psychosis and delusion, that to him all prophets are false prophets by their very nature, anybody would assume he must have been very clear about the matter himself. In fact, whoever those commentators think they have been reading or listening to or learning from, one thing can be said for sure. It certainly isn't Jung. The most surprising thing about this revision is how extremely brief his comments are about prophecy itself: "In general, I wouldn't want to deny that real prophets do appear. But, by way of precaution, I would prefer as a very first step to question each individual case -- because to accept someone as genuine is far too serious a matter to be decided flippantly or offhandedly. Every true prophet defends himself valiantly against the unconscious demands and expectations of this role. So, when a prophet just springs out of nowhere on the spur of the moment, it's better to suspect a psychic loss of equilibrium." Of course, to the sceptically minded this is the plainest confirmation of Jung's sceptical-mindedness. Nothing could be easier than to join him in brushing off the whole topic of prophecy, flippantly, offhandedly, as pathological or very dubious at best. But the fact is that in the space of this short half-paragraph he has mentioned the possibility of real prophets, genuine prophets, 262 PART THREE true prophets no less than three times -- quite consistently with the way he often mentions the same possibility elsewhere. And all that's needed is simply to step through the door he is holding open." Jung's statement that "every true prophet defends himself valiantly against the unconscious demands and expectations of this role" belongs in a very specific context. It refers straight back to what he has just been saying a moment before about how only the rarest and best among people are strong enough in their longing that they are willing to expose themselves, on purpose, to the incalculable danger of being devoured by the primordial unconscious; about how only the truest heroes ever manage to defeat the monster of the depths not just once, in some instant glorious battle, but time and time again; about how the only way to win the mythical treasure, the secret power, the hidden magic contained inside those depths is by absolutely refusing to identify with their collective force. And if one cares to put together everything Jung says or hints at here about this figure of the true prophet, the resulting picture couldn't be clearer. Real prophets have the strength and virtue to do what no one else is willing, or able, to do. They struggle with all their might against their own ambitions and vanity; manage to maintain their psychological balance by knowing, in particular, how to laugh at the fools they are and never take themselves too seriously. They fight against the constant temptation to display themselves as prophets in public, together with the usual dramas that involves. Above all, though, they refuse to identify with the intoxicating role of prophet even inwardly or in private. And this plays itself out not just invisibly -- because, in the hard-won battle to become a real prophet, there is nobody there to make a claim THE SUNSET WAY 263 about anything or parade some prophetic status -- but also with immense patience over a long period of time. That's precisely the reason why, in his few fleeting comments about prophecy, Jung makes everything revolve around slowness and perseverance as opposed to speed. Becoming a prophet isn't a matter of becoming an overnight sensation: it takes time, because first one has to become the prophet and saviour of one's own being. And judging whether someone really is a prophet isn't an issue of making instant, spur-of-the-moment decisions either. That, too, needs time. But you may notice, now I've spelled all this out, that he doesn't say any of it openly. And the name for that is magic. He says it all without seeming to say anything; touches on the subject of prophets for the briefest moment or two only to let himself be distracted almost immediately and, before you notice what's happened, rush off into talking about something else. He cleverly uses double negatives -- "I wouldn't want to deny"" -- rather than committing himself by stating anything directly in a positive way. And the whole time he is counting on you not only not to notice what he is actually pointing to, which would require an active attention not many people have, but to project your own unconscious prejudices onto his words and assume he is saying the precise opposite of what he is. In other words: it's not enough for him to speak theoretically about prophecy. Instead, even when he is talking about prophets he instinctively follows the hallowed and time-honoured tradi- tion of speaking as a prophet. He hints and hides rather than talking openly; conveys his meaning to the very few who are willing and patient enough to listen; but to everybody else he gives just enough rope to let them 264 PART THREE hang themselves, because all they really want is to go on being deceived. This prophetic language is in essence no different from the prophetic language used by Empedocles, or Parmenides, or anyone else who has to communicate after coming back from the world of the dead. Underneath its veil of apparent vagueness it contains an uncanny exactness -- a mathematical precision which we ignore at our peril. That preciseness is the reality of the timeless need for true, authentic prophets to serve their culture or community in ways they alone are ready to do. And, if one cares to consider Jung's other writings, it's only too obvious there was nothing else he could possibly hint at or say. But even though there are so many more words one could add to his, and no doubt should, I'll simply cut things short. While Jungians like Edward Edinger were cheerfully psychoanalyzing and classifying and diagnosing prophets in their books, their lectures, their practices, Jung for his own part kept crying out: Keep your hands off our prophets and leave them alone! Stop trying to analyze or classify them from an individual point of view because it's the stupidest thing to do. They are acting, speaking, urgently communicating as representatives of the collective unconscious and burrowing into the details of their personal psychology is futile. While a Jungian like James Kirsch was insisting that any prophet who hasn't had the benefit of a Jungian analysis will automatically become an unconscious "victim of the process of individuation", Jung himself was stating on the contrary that throughout the whole of history prophets have always served their people as supreme models of individuation. And, far from being unconscious, they are the most conscious guides and leaders of their people; lone beacons of psychological] health. THE SUNSET WAY 265 While Edinger makes such a fuss about prophets' greatest weakness lying in the fact that they are not able to adapt to the people or the world around them, Jung himself hints that the greatest strength of prophets -- just like artists -- lies precisely in their failure to adapt, because this is the one way they can help bring the collective imbalance back again into balance. While Jungians in general mostly tend to see prophets as perfect models of inflation, miniature psychological disasters waiting to happen, Jung took the extraordinary step of portray- ing them as their people's best protection against the supreme psychological disaster: as the only ones strong enough to take a stand against the devastating ravages of collective, not to mention individual, inflation. And while there is no denying that anyone seeing visions or hearing messages straight from God is running an obvious psychological risk, there is also no denying that nothing could be more dangerous for a culture than ignoring the true prophets who -- in spite of all their own struggles to stop hearing or to prevent themselves seeing -- still end up bringing messages and visions from another world because they are the only ones able to perceive the real needs of their times.*° For most of these points Jung would refer to the Hebrew prophets and the Jewish people. This might make it seem ever so easy nowadays to dismiss what he says as only appropriate in a specific historical context; only relevant to some other time or place. But that would be to ignore the absolutely fundamental importance he ascribed to the Bible in his own psychology. As he tried to explain, for a westerner there is no psychology without the Bible. "We must read the Bible or we shall not understand psychology. Our psychology, our whole lives, our language and imagery, are built upon the Bible." And there is a significant warning here: of course we can use Jung's work 266 PART THREE however we want, convert it into a handy tool to suit our own purposes. But unless we know the Bible almost as well as he did, can pick up on his subtle references and hints, we are never in a thousand years going to understand his real meaning. If prophets were essential for the psychological health of the Jewish people, they are essential for ours. If they were the few individuals among the Jews who could be called most individuated, least inflated, most sane, then perhaps they are the only figures available to us in our sophisticated civilized existence who are not completely crazy. And if such suggestions sound more than a little strange, it can help to remember that for Jung the most perfectly ordinary people in our modern western culture aren't anywhere near as perfect as they seem. Quite to the contrary: every such person nowadays "suffers from a hubris of consciousness that borders on the pathological". But the most telling thing of all is that in his eyes even the most extreme, most psychotic, most impossibly deluded case of a religious inflation due to someone acting out the grand role of prophet is no worse than "the rationalistic and political psychosis that is the affliction of our day"" -- the collective psychosis of our world." And so Jung's few quick pointers to the true, real, genuine prophet simply disappear; vanish, ignored, back into the silence where they belong. But these brief comments were only the start of what he would end up contributing to his textbook account of prophecy and the problem of inflation. And the most important thing to note about his final version of the text is an extremely simple one: the number of his words. For every word he uses, in that space of halfa small paragraph, to touch on the dangers of becoming a prophet he goes straight on to use four or five words -- in the longer paragraphs that follow -- to illustrate the dangers of becoming a prophet's disciple. And here we suddenly encounter a very different face of Jung. The entire passage turns into a delightfully relaxed but scornful parody of all those devoted followers who find no end of sweetness and lazy joy in sitting at the Master's feet, laying all the liability and responsibility for their lives at Master's door, guarding against having a single thought or idea of their own, scooping the great truth straight from their Master's hands so they can mindlessly repeat it as if this somehow makes it their own truth: their own answer, their own discovery. For them it's an ideal situation. Somebody else is there to carry all the burden and responsibilities, the real-life dangers 268 PART THREE and risks, while they creep about cowering behind their false modesty; gloating over the magnificent treasury of wisdom they claim for themselves although it isn't even theirs, bursting onto the world scene to proclaim themselves proud guardians of an exclusive truth denied to everyone else, flushed and swollen with their own borrowed importance. At the same time, through their boundless adulation and deification of the Master they are able to enjoy the supreme pleasure of also feeling themselves grow in size. Even while outwardly appearing to be ever so ordinary, all of a sudden they are filling the skies -- because it never dawns on them that to try hiding away in modesty and humility from the imagined dangers of inflation is among the greatest possible forms of inflation. Naturally the most striking thing about this meticulous description is the way Jung has managed to shift the whole focus away from what by any ordinary logic he ought to be explaining, which is a prophet's inflation, onto the inflation of a prophet''s disciples. And if what he describes with such intensity sounds strangely reminiscent of the dedicated Jungian Edward Edinger, proclaiming Jung's unparalleled greatness of stature while deriv- ing enormous satisfaction from his own modesty and smallness, that's no accident. In fact Edinger was well known for speaking of himself as, very precisely, "an ordinary man in most respects except for my ability to see Jung's size". One could truthfully say that -- with a prophetic clarity -- Jung had already managed to see what kind of things were going to be unfolding for his work inside the space of a single generation.* But, just as naturally, nothing would be worse than to exaggerate. The best experts insist they have already fully accounted for Jung's intimate insight into a pupil's inflation, and state THE SUNSET WAY 269 with utmost confidence that -- although in theory there might always be one or two bad apples among the very lowest grade of Jungians who perhaps could fit his image of inflated disciples -- this passage has no bearing at all on the Jungian community as a whole. On the contrary, his acute sensitivity towards the dynamics of inflation shows how infinitely careful he was to keep any such nonsense well away from the world of Jungians. In fact, we are told, he shaped and formed his Jungian community ever so consciously as a deliberate defence and antidote against such childish dynamics; a perfect model of how to avoid them. As for what could possibly have prompted such a passionate portrayal of the prophet's inflated disciples: maybe he was think- ing about a couple of lost Theosophists or other cultists who, by some unaccountable twist of fate, had once washed up in his consulting room.*° And this is what happens when those who write about Jung have no idea of what he meant by the power of the unconscious. If we really want to understand what Jung was getting at, with his textbook account of a prophet's disciples, it can be helpful to start by looking back at the Red b00k -- and at what he was actually saying behind the scenes. On the surface it can all sound perfectly splendid. With his message from the underworld he is coming to set everyone free, clapping everybody on the back and encouraging them to follow their own way; find their own truth to live by which is true only for them. But, underneath that glitzy surface, Jung is also saying something slightly different: Stop trying to copy me. Leave me alone. I am sick to death of everyone imitating everything I say or do. For God's sake find your own way and stop leaning on me as if I am going to fill your emptiness, answer your questions for you, miraculously give you the truth to replace all your lies. Stop sucking me dry, as if my life is what you need to live your life. 2/0 PART THREE And don't try taking my mysteries or stealing my secrets, because they are not yours -- they are mine. Have the guts to face your darkness and jump into the crater of your own volcano because that's the only way you are ever going to find what's yours. The truth is, though, that being imitated was one thing he soon learned he would have to put up with even from the Jungian men and women who seemed closest to him. There would be imitation of his deepest secrets, of his teachings, of his smallest tics and mannerisms too. Absolutely the last thing that the people around him were going to do, he realized, was to leave him alone.*' And this is where we come back, again, to his peculiarly close sense of affinity with Empedocles. It was around twenty-five years after the huge struggles he documented in the Red book that Jung revisited one of his favourite topics: the descent into hell through a volcanic crater and, much more specifically, the legends of Empedocles dying by throwing himself into Mount Etna. But, this time, he couldn't resist cracking one of those trademark jokes that somehow manage to reveal as much about him as any of his most serious scientific texts. Of course he could never quite get to the bottom of why Empedocles would have killed himself in such a way, for the simple reason that the legends were no more talking about Empedocles' physical or literal death than Jung had physically died when he made his own journeys to the underworld. Even so, that didn't stop. him from trying -- and driving home a point or two in the process. I often wonder, he said during a famous seminar in 1938, why he did it. Ancient writers had their own kinds of theories and explanations. "But in the biography of old Empedocles we THE SUNSET WAY 271 get the real clue! You know, he was very popular: wherever he appeared, large crowds of people came to hear him talk, and when he left town about ten thousand people followed him to the next one where he had to talk again. I assume he was human, so what could he do?" And Jung has the answer. Empedocles had to find some place where no one could run after him: somewhere "to escape his ten thousand lovely followers". So he jumped into the volcano. Here, in this hilariously simple story, we almost have it all: crowds upon crowds of devoted followers doing just what inflated disciples do best, pursuing Empedocles everywhere to scoop out his wisdom and suck up his every word as if it holds the secret of life, transferring their hopes and expectations and fantasies onto the Master while laying their burdens and responsibilities at his door until he simply couldn't stand it any more. At the same time it doesn't need much of a sixth sense to be able to detect in Jung's ridiculously forced explanation not only a major vein of sympathy for old Empedocles, but an even greater trace of autobiographical self-reference. By telling the story this way, he is hardly just telling the story of a famous ancient prophet and saviour called Empedocles. He is saying something essential about himself. And, as it happens, there is no need at all for any special senses here -- because we also have the most explicit of statements from someone who, for years, fiercely treasured her role as one of Jung's most trusted confidantes. Barbara Hannah has left a very convenient note explaining that, whenever she heard Empedocles' name being mentioned, she couldn't help thinking back to what Jung had said about him. Immediately, she would be reminded of the way he used to describe the wise old man as throwing himself into a volcano because of all the people who "flocked around him wanting to 2/2 PART THREE hear about things of life. Transferences drove him there, said Dr. Jung, and added: 'and if you are not careful, I shall land there too!'" So, all of a sudden, those "ten thousand lovely followers" devotedly chasing their Master everywhere are no longer Theosophists. And they are no longer Empedocles' disciples, either -- because they are also Jung's. What's more: they are not just some low-grade would-be Jungians living at a distant remove from his faithful inner circle. They even include, or perhaps one would have to say especially include, those very Jungians who considered themselves his nearest and dearest. And the one most unavoidable consequence of all this is that the person playing the role of prophet to these prophet's disciples is no longer only Empedocles. On his own admission, it's Carl Jung himself." But in case anyone has an illusion that the resulting picture of Jung as the great prophet figure surrounded by inflated, un- conscious disciples is just due to a temporary lapse of judgement or seriousness on his part I'll quickly shift the focus forward by another twenty years -- to one of the last sets of interviews he ever gave before he died. In June 1958 he sat down with his secretary to talk for a bit about death and the dead. We all, he explained, have a particular task or burden which is to find an answer through the living of our own lives to the questions left unanswered by our ancestors: by the dead. This is what it really means to find one's myth. To do that, though, one has to learn to live very close to the dead; one's own dead. And for him, he adds, little by little that burden has become less and less because through his life he has answered them. He has done everything he needed to, or could. To his own dead he gave his own answer, and that has nothing whatsoever to do with THE SUNSET WAY 273 anyone else. It's nobody else's business! The trouble is that the only thing people want to know is what my answer is so they can mindlessly rattle it off and make my answer appear to be their answer. Of course this means they are leaving their own dead completely unanswered, but they couldn't care less -- because to set about discovering their own living answer to their own dead through their own effort would be far too uncomfortable, much too risky and stressful. Let's just go ahead and project all our burdens onto old Jung, they say, because he knows how to make everything fine and good. Here it is again: lazy followers laying all their burdens at the Master's feet, dodging the inconvenience of having to search for an answer themselves because it's so much easier imitating and impressively parroting the Master's own answer instead. After all, isn't it an unquestionable fact that the prophet's disciple possesses "the great truth -- not his own discovery, of course, but received straight from the Master's hands?" And inwardly he was just as sick of the situation as he had been forty, almost fifty, years before. There is one other thing, too, that he bitterly adds in the middle of complaining about the living while explaining about the dead. Who on earth, he asks, really understands anything about this at allP Where, he wants to know, is there anyone who in all honesty understands the slightest part of what this actually means?" It sounds an insignificant enough thing to say -- the kind of comment to excuse as a purely rhetorical question and put aside. But that would be a major mistake. Often Jung used to mention the one sure, telltale sign of a saviour figure or prophet or magician: the utter conviction such people hold that there's no one in the world who understands them. So the irony is that, in making precisely this point while 274 PART THREE lamenting his inflated followers' inability to understand him, he is offering the most archetypal confirmation of his own role as a prophet. In fact the older he got, the more insistently he kept asking himself who understood what he had been trying to do. The answer was always the same. Someone might understand a bit about this or that, then make a big meal of it. As for who understands the whole, though, how it all hangs together -- to be perfectly frank, there is no one at all. It's an answer that runs like a painful refrain through the interviews he gave towards the end of his life. But at the same time, in those interviews he also happened to give a very particular name to this cry of incomprehension. He called it the cry of Merlin: the prophet's cry that no one understands and that makes the prophet cry even louder because no one understands it. This is the cry that Jung identified as his own, in just the same way he identified himself with Merlin. And so we have Empedocles the prophet, with whose predicament Jung identified so strongly; we have Merlin the prophet, too; lastly we have Jung. But rather than just lumping all three of these figures together as prophets, which would be the laziest of things to do, the crucial point to note is that each of them is a prophet with a difference because of the one characteristic they share in common. They all renounced the role of prophet. Empedocles renounced it by dying because he couldn't take the nonsense any more, Merlin by withdrawing into the forest and crying because he couldn't put up with it either. Jung renounced it, as well, by absolutely refusing to identify with being a prophet -- or let himself get trapped in the golden cage where prophets end up imprisoned together with their disciples. THE SUNSET WAY 275 The paradox for him was that, in spite of all the exotic trappings and fancy trimmings, really there is nothing mysterious whatsoever about the unconscious relationship between a prophet and a prophet's disciple. From a psychological point of view the whole saga is "so humanly understandable that it would be a matter for astonishment if it led to any further destination whatever". And when something potentially so sacred is turned into the dullest example of business as usual, the only mystery left is the one of not knowing whether it would be better just to laugh or cry. The true mystery, which is the mystery of entering a world no human can hope to understand, begins with simply renouncing everything. It starts at the moment when, like the sun at midheaven, we have reached our own highest point and are faced with the great choice in our life. Either we go on struggling pointlessly to keep climbing higher and higher; automatically repeat whatever strategies we are used to until at last there is nothing left to do except accept the final pleasures of a graceful retirement; become stiffer and drier only to end up unconsciously sinking down, like everybody else, into the waters of death. Or else we die before we die and make that descent quite consciously: "No one should deny the danger of the descent, but it can be risked. No one eed risk it, but it is certain that some one will. And let those who go down the sunset way do so with open eyes, for it is a sacrifice which daunts even the gods."° After such a sacrifice the bird, at least the prophet bird, is no longer in the cage. But don't imagine this is the end of Jung the prophet. It's only the end of his soaring public ambitions to become a prophet -- so that he can sink back into his own primordial depths, and the real work of the prophet can begin. For Jung it was perfectly clear: the descent he made into the crater of the underworld, his major encounter with the unconscious, that immense labour and love he devoted year after year to creating the Red book, are what marked the start of his real work because everything he would do later came from here. One can understand the wisdom of those intellectuals who have had the courage to speak out against the Red book -- to denounce it as utter rubbish that belongs in the garbage can of history and should never have been published. The truth is that it's loaded with such grossness, so much of the disgusting crudity characteristic of the unconscious, even Jung himself was thoroughly embarrassed and discomforted by what it contains. But the trick is that unless you embrace all the crudeness of the unconscious reality wholeheartedly, unless you know like Jung that the pearl is only found in the filth, you are going to end up empty-handed with nothing aside from a cheap necklace of dried theories; of hollow concepts. It would have been best if you had never begun." As for the scholars who have been wise enough to embrace the Red book and make it an object of study, the question remains whether they have understood much better than those who just reject it. Even its editor has insisted that of course this is a text to be understood psychologically -- a word that can mean a million THE SUNSET WAY 277 things to a thousand people -- instead of religiously, let alone mystically. Or as another scholar has explained: at the start of the Red book Jung sets off in quest of his soul, not in search of God. And that proves this is not some religious text but simply a work of psychology, a book for the analytical mind. All I can say is that, if this was true, it would be very strange indeed. Right from the start of his career, years before the Red book was even a glimmer in his eye, Jung had always seen the work he did as religious through and through. As he said to Freud, quite frankly, back in 1910: the organized religions have lost their instinctive power, our psychology alone can replace them, but "religion can only be replaced by religion". It's a statement that would echo, more and more refined although just as distinctly, down through the rest of his days. To be sure, many conscientious efforts have been made over the years to blur or simply obliterate the religious dimensions of his work; to silence, as effectively as possible, his own emphasis on the religious nature of what happened to him during his descent into the underworld. But such acts of suppression change nothing, at least nothing that counts.*° And as for this question of psychology's connection to religion -- we may as well deal with the issue once and for all. It can be almost a religious experience to realize how few people even in the Jungian community have taken the trouble to come to terms with one of Jung's most important writings, where he states just what psychology is and why it matters to him so much. With crystal clarity he explains that, far from being a replacement or substitute for religion, it's the very essence of religion -- because the central concern of psychology is, by definition, the mystery of the soul: 2/8 PART THREE "So long as religion is only belief and outward form, and the religious function is not experienced in our own souls, nothing profound or radical has happened. It still remains to be understood that the mysterium magnum", life's great mystery, "is first and foremost rooted in the human psyche. Whoever doesn't know this from inner experience may be a most learned theologian, but doesn't have a clue about religion". Then Jung simply moves from provocative to even more provocative. "Ifit was not a fact of experience that supreme values reside in the soul", he goes straight on to add, "psychology would not interest me in the least ... I have been accused of "deifying the soul'. But it's not I -- it's God himself who deified it! It's not I who assigned a religious function to the soul, I merely presented the facts." And so he arrives at the heart of psychology, as well as the core of people's resistance to it: "If the theologian really believes in the almighty power of God on the one hand and in the validity of dogma on the other, why then does he not trust God to speak in the soul? Why this fear of psychology?" In other words, here we have his own statement of what psychology is -- as well as why it matters so much. It's the art or science of learning to listen to the voice of God speaking in the human soul. Far from the soul existing in Jung's mind as some psychological alternative to religion, or God, it's the only possible pathway to both. This is why for him Soul is Wisdom -- Sophia in Greek, Sapientia in Latin. Inside the Red book itself he painted this spirit of Wisdom just as he wanted her to be seen: standing tall, veiled but magnificent, in a crowded church. And later he would comment on what he had painted: In all her ambiguity and ambivalence she -- Soul, Sophia -- appears with her veiled face as an extraordinary, utterly mysterious THE SUNSET WAY 279 feminine being "in a church, taking the place of the altar". This is how the reality of the soul will eventually be restored "to the Christian church, not as an icon but as the altar itself". But to understand the significance of his painting we also need to go back a bit in time. To be more specific, we have to go back to another of those letters Jung wrote to Freud when he was still trying to convince him that the real future of psychology lies in gradually pulling away the veil from the secret at the heart of religion while making sure to keep its essential mystery hidden: "I have the feeling that this is a time full of wonders. And, if the omens from the gods do not deceive, I dare say you are quite correct that thanks to your discoveries we indeed find ourselves on the threshold of something truly glorious -- something I can't think of any name for aside from the Gnostic notion of Sophia, which is an Alexandrian expression perfectly suited for the reincarnation of ancient wisdom in psychoanalysis." The only thing to add is that Jung was never able to help along this process of Sophia's reincarnation while he stayed with Freud. To do that, he first had to make the journey to hell all on his own. And if we want to know what the Red book really is, this is it: the physical reincarnation of ancient wisdom which he already had predicted to Freud.» But with the publication, now, of that veiled wisdom we are faced with a problem. People are notoriously adept at making as much or as little as they want out of words, even images -- at stripping religion of its religiousness, ignoring anything they dislike, inserting all their pet political correctnesses. So if we care to understand a little about the birthing of that private and hidden and secret wisdom, about what the process of creating the Red book involved at around the time it was actually being created, we are going to have to be able to look back at it from a fresh perspective. 280 PART THREE And there are probably no better eyes to choose than Cary de Angulo's. A well-educated American, she came to Zurich in 1921. Soon she caught Jung's attention not because of her devotion but, on the contrary, because of her rigorous impartiality; because of her critical objectivity which he would learn to value more and more over the years; on account of her ability to stand beside him always ready to challenge, tease, call his bluff, when everyone else was too terrified to say a word. Even so, during the first year after she arrived she was explaining to him that "Every hour I spend with you has holiness in it for me' -- not, she adds, in the sense that she is worshipping him but in the sense that his simple presence inspires her to strain and reach towards something only Jung has managed to express so potently. And this sensation of a holiness in his presence was something far from unique to her alone. But it was well over another year later before he found himself guided to invite her to help him with his work on the Red book. {mmediately she realized what this meant: that he was expecting her to keep her spirit so pure, her physical body so unintrusive, her mind filled with so much tenderness that she would be incapable of causing him any harm because "you are taking me into the inner dwelling house of your soul". Before she ever had a chance to see the Red book for herself, she was already aware -- obviously because of what Jung had communicated to her -- that it was a being, a personality, in its own right. Instinctively she felt she would far rather never see or touch it than approach it in a way that could come across as disrespectful, aggressive, brusque. And when she arrived at his home for her first day of work, she found it open in his study. Even so, something inside her prevented her from getting too close. The book, for her, was "so full of magic" that she couldn't even bring herself to sit down right in front of it. And she felt THE SUNSET WAY 281 so unworthy of leaning over it that she would twist her body as well as her eyes almost beyond what was physically possible, like someone trying to bend over to look round a corner. The very last thing she wished was to impose on it in any way -- as she gently allowed the pregnant atmosphere of his library to fold her back into the vast "shadows of past ages".>° Nothing comes even close, though, to the importance of another passage in Cary de Angulo's personal records. She has been acknowledging how she is not always able to follow Jung or agree with him intellectually about this and that; how there are some important truths which for him are self-evident facts that she doesn't have the evidence, and maybe never will, to accept. But strangely and quite mysteriously, as she admits to him, none of this changes a thing. In spite of every apparent pointer to the contrary, she simply knows that as a living and embodied human being he is right -- and the reason she knows this is because "Your personality is that 'Kleinod' that reappears in the world only now and then. I know that to be so and why it is so." What she is claiming to know, here, with such certainty can seem so obscure it's hardly worth pausing for. But, as with so many details surrounding Jung, if we ignore it we'll throw something infinitely significant away. "Kleinod", in German, means a precious jewel. And there is no doubting at all what Cary de Angulo is referring to. One of Jung's most important works, Psychological types, had been published only the year before; and a central thread running through that book is, precisely, the theme of the "Kleinod" or precious jewel. This jewel, as he explains there, is the only thing truly capable of easing humanity's sufferings. Even more than that, though, it's the renewer of life and of the sacred. In fact, it's the creator of the new God. 282 PART THREE The trouble is that, thanks to the rationalism of our conscious human world, it gets completely lost. 'The jewel is divine; is the irrational, impossible solution to humanity's problems which had been foretold by the prophets long ago. It represents the birth of the redeemer, the saviour. And as Jung goes to the special trouble of pointing out while evoking his own, tireless quest for the impossible: "The saviour is always a figure endowed with magical power who makes the impossible possible". But for exactly this reason the jewel is rejected by everyone who thinks only in terms of the possible, the rational. Even the simplest of people are completely dumbfounded by it, are left suspicious as well as troubled. To any conventional sense of conscience it's utterly disgusting. The high priests, too, not only see nothing divine in it. On the contrary, they consider it the most insolent violation of God and just shudder at the sight of it in their total disgust -- because even the priests are rationalists through and through. The academics of course dismiss it as lacking any of the qualities that would make it worth studying. The jewellers throw it out as a fake. The worst absurdity of all, though, is that you can't even try to get rid of it because the police will catch you for possession of illegal goods. And this jewel represents not just the freedom, but also the duty, to be what one is. That's the reason why people are so frightened of it, so quick to hurl it into the streets and even attack anyone who happens to find it. All that's left, then, is for it to do its impossible and transformative and seemingly destructive work deep in the collective unconscious. It can be buried, almost forgotten. Or it can be rationalized, which in its way amounts to the very same thing. But it can't be stopped because this precious jewel is the incarnate Bodhisattva, the Buddha, the Enlightened One; the jewel in the lotus. And as Jung goes on to add: THE SUNSET WAY 283 "The saviour-nature of the jewel is made perfectly clear by the fact that it appears only once in every thousand years. It's a rare event -- this appearance of a saviour, a Saoshyant, a Buddha."*° So when Cary de Angulo speaks quietly about him being the precious jewel that "reappears in the world only now and then", she is not shouting from the rooftops but just talking in private to herself or Jung. And she is describing him as the great saviour. He is the Christ-like cornerstone predicted by the ancient prophets such as Isaiah, before being rejected by the builders in precisely the way Isaiah had foretold; he is a Buddha of the West. Or he is the Saoshyant, an expression Jung himself would later explain by placing it in its proper context of ancient Zoroastrian religion: "It is in the Zoroastrian teaching that every thousand years -- which simply means an indefinite world period, about half of a month of the great platonic year -- a Saoshyant appears (that is a reaper, a saviour), who teaches people a new revelation, a new truth, or renews old truths, a mediator between god and man." This timeless figure of the Saoshyant is always "called out through the need of the time, the emergencies of the actual epoch". Or in other words, each Saoshyant is invariably summoned by a very specific situation which Jung himself defines as a situation of enormous unconsciousness; massive confusion; a collective sense of disorientation when people are at a loss because they don't have a clue any more what to do. And so these Saoshyants, these wisest of "prophets, appear in times of trouble, when mankind is in a state of confusion, when an old orientation has been lost and a new one is needed". It's the simplest of logics: "when God dies, man needs a new orientation. In that moment the father of all prophets, the old wise man, ought to appear to give a new revelation, to give birth to a new truth." 284 PART THREE And nothing might seem easier than to believe that when Cary de Angulo describes Jung himself as one of these saviours or Saoshyants bringing their latest revelation, "the father of all prophets" reborn, this is just the result of her own unbalanced imagination gone wild -- except for the fact that it was her rigorous ability to keep a firm grip on her feelings and imaginings which allowed him to trust her in the first place. For all its comforting appealingness, soon we'll see that to dismiss in this way what she is trying to say would be a complete and utter dead end: a very reasonable dead end but, still, a dead end. As Jung makes sure to emphasize halfway through his detailed account of the "Kleinod" or saving jewel, any normal and reasonable attitude is totally incapable of understanding what the jewel means because there is nothing normal about it at all. "Reason must always seek the solution in some rational, consistent, logical way, which is certainly justifiable enough in all normal situations but is entirely inadequate when it comes to the really great and decisive questions." We can go along fooling ourselves for a while that our collective reasonableness and rationality will safely carry us through. But "when the rational way proves to be a cul de sac -- as it always does after a time -- the solution comes from the side it was least expected". This is the unfailing law of psychology which even psychologists often fail to take the time, or immense trouble, to learn: that eventually the rational solution always fails. And as for the alternative, Jung goes straight on to explain that the other side -- the side which is least expected to provide any kind of solution when all else fails, but always does -- is the side of the prophets.' THE SUNSET WAY 285 After all: it was bound to be the case that the only possible approach to the reality of the prophets would always be from the scorned side, the silenced side, the disgusting side of prophecy. At the end of the day the only lasting good is going to come from the side openly mocked by rationalists, disposed of by Jung scholars, rejected by Jungians, even repulsive to Jung himself. And here is where we finally arrive -- whether in what could be called, quite rightly but very impolitely, our blindness we realize it or not -- at what really matters. It's best not to dabble in the Red book, because one thing is absolutely certain: whatever we believe, whatever we proudly imagine, we're not going to be allowed to leave with our respectability intact. Of course we can try to fool ourselves individually and collectively, but nothing is going to change that unconscious fact. If we think such a book is meant to help us process new ideas in our busy brains, put out thoughtful words through our busy mouths, we are mightily mistaken. We have to go down much further than that -- past even the feelings in our chest, right down to our entrails. As Cary de Angulo understood perfectly well, she was nowhere with the Red book until she was able to experience it forever twisting her bowels. Some things are just too self-evident to be denied. And one of them is that the Red book is a book of prophecy. Commentators have flocked to comment on the undeniable. For instance, it was only when the First World War broke out that Jung started work on what would turn into his Red book -- because only then did he realize that the stream of horrific visions and dreams he had been experiencing during the months, then THE SUNSET WAY 287 weeks, leading up to the beginning of war weren't just a sign he was going mad as he originally feared. They had been prophetic. In other words: the Red book's creation was based, from the very start, on the prophetic power of his own unconscious and on the intensity of his need to explore what this means. Then there is the solemn sequence of quotations from the prophet Isaiah that he chose to write out on its opening page; as its opening page. After he'd finished carefully copying them he made sure to add his own name alongside the precise place, and year, when he wrote them -- with the unmistakable implication that he, his work, this book he was just starting, were fulfilments of the ancient prophecies. This is not to mention, at least not yet, the prophetic tone running through the book as a whole. And there is even the title he formally gave it: Liber novus or "The new book", indicating with all due clarity that a replacement for the New Testament of Christianity had arrived. "Thus", as its first editor has been bound to admit, "it was presented as a prophetic work".*8 But then the only thing to do is simply to hold one's breath -- and wait for the inevitable. The three quotations from the prophet Isaiah that fill out the first page of Jung's Red book are also cited by him elsewhere: in Psychological types, the text he was writing at roughly the same time as his much more private work on the Red book. That's not all, though, because both Psychological types and the Red book quote each of the three passages in exactly the same sequence even though this is different from their original sequence inside the book of Isaiah itself. Quite obviously what he has to say about them there, in Psychological types, will have a bearing on why he is using them here. And the fact is that, there, he quotes these passages from 288 PART THREE Isaiah ever so specifically to show what happens when people are brought face to face with the "Kleinod" or precious jewel -- that very same jewel Cary de Angulo had come to see inside the person of Jung himself. The three quotations talk about the saviour opening a path through the middle of the desert, about the opening of the eyes of the blind. But first they raise the question of who in the world of humans is going to believe this, or to whom this divine secret could possibly be revealed, because there is nothing about the saviour figure that seems worth respecting or valuing at all. Everyone tries to find some way of hiding from it: sooner or later ends up scorning and despising it, instead. For his own part Jung takes the time to explain, in modern terms as plainly as he can, just what Isaiah means. This rejection that the prophet describes is precisely what happens when people in their total blindness manage to get rid of the impossible saviour or Saoshyant -- the father of all prophets -- by pushing aside the unexpected and rejecting everything they consider unsuitable, unacceptable, inappropriate. And he warns, in fact prophesies, that the way people nowadays will keep on doing this is by retreating into their collective rationality or rationalistic collectivity. They ll do it by huddling in the reassuring warmth of their mutual reasonableness and protecting each other, but especially themselves, from the irrational mystery at the heart of the unknown." One might have hoped that some intelligent person, somewhere, would have managed to put two and two together and realize what this all means. But nobody has noticed how Jung's prophecy has already been fulfilled to the letter. Perhaps the most obvious example of what he was predicting is a fifty-page review of the Red book, published by one of the most highly reputed Jungians alive today and instructing the Jungian collectivity in what to think and do. The discipline THE SUNSET WAY 289 of psychology, it insists, "belongs to the generality" because psychology's only real concern is with "universal reason". This is why each psychologist is not just some private individual but above all is "a member of the scientific community' -- and it's why every psychologist's solemn duty is to reject the Red book's appalling irrationality. "We are well advised to dissociate ourselves from the Red book and instead base our work on Jung's published psychology", his firmly established body of scientific writings, because "we have not become psychologists in order to listen to revelations". Not every Jungian, though, has the strength or weakness of character needed to dismiss the Red book out of hand; and this is the point where the real power of that rational collectivity Jung was referring to comes into play, as the irresistible spirit of our time. Also, it's the point where our own minds become incom- parably clever at tricking themselves -- because the best way to reject something one finds embarrassing is to make a big fuss about accepting it first before coming up with a fine, long list of reasons for rejecting it later. And so, thanks to the slow growth of consensus, an eminently sensible compromise has already been reached. Jung's Red book may seem prophetic at first glance, but really it's not. He can be excused to an extent for believing that those dreams and visions he had were prophetic of the great war to come, but there are far more respectable and rational ways to explain them away instead. The Red book's tone and language might sound sincerely prophetic to an untrained ear. But in fact they are just rhetorical flourishes: nothing of the slightest substance or significance. As for the fanfare about a "new book", it certainly does convey a sense of something religious -- but the less said about that, inside our progressively secular world, the better. 290 PART THREE And to set all these unfortunate issues to rest comes the most indispensable, most decisive argument of all. Jung himself was no prophet but, on the contrary, an anti-prophet because he did the very opposite of meekly accepting a prophetic role as any genuine prophet would or should. Instead, he courageously displays his freethinking modernity by questioning and doubting the whole business of prophecy; arguing with it; fighting it with every fibre of his being. As for the resulting tension, the extraordinary conflict pitting prophet against anti-prophet, it runs through the veins of the Red book -- and only goes to prove how completely removed this is from any simple, traditional, old-fashioned prophetic text. And the only question left is how low it's possible to hold one's head in shame at the unfathomable ignorance, demonstrated by these statements, about the reality not only of prophecy but also of Jung. First there is that little matter of his prophetic visions and dreams. On top of the very sensible commentators who instinctively know -- just like Porphyry -- that any talk about prophecy is something for us to leave aside as irrational rubbish and be done with, there is also another much more specific phenomenon involved. This is the new orthodoxy rapidly springing up in Jungian circles which insists on abolishing the word "prophetic", whenever discussing Jung's visions or dreams, and replacing it with the far safer-sounding term "synchronistic" so there will be no more unpleasant overtones of prophecy or of mysterious glimpses into the future. Those experiences of his during the lead-up to war and the start of his work on the Red book are something we can comfortably explain away now, by turning his own scientific language against him, as synchronicity. And everyone can sigh THE SUNSET WAY 291 a breath of relief at not only getting rid of the disturbance but, in the process, getting rid of Jung." More than two thousand years before his time, Aristotle had already done a fine job of killing off all that superstitious silliness about inspired insights into the future and forcing it into a virtual underworld of its own. Since then, intellectuals have lined up through the centuries to hand him "the palm of honour" for being the person who "first entirely denied the existence of prophetic dreams". Even Sigmund Freud ended up glad to accept the reality of telepathy along with any number of other things but, whenever faced with the question of whether dreams might be prophetic, couldn't resist kneeling to the rational authority of Aristotle. With Jung things couldn't have been more different. Along with a handful of equally rebellious predecessors whose memory he treasured, he not only insisted on accepting the existence of prophetic visions and dreams. He even reserved for them pride of place inside his worldview; and this is a position from which, with his instinctive underworld sensitivities, he never budged or changed." Of course he was extra-cautious about the ways he actually talked about such things. There was always the most delicate balance in what he chose to say or not say, or to whom. But it's another matter entirely when even the most devoted Jungians end up reverting to the role of little Aristotles. And at the very least, if they do find themselves needing to settle back into that habitual attitude of rational murder which Jung had almost killed himself trying to break, one could at least expect them to be conscious of just what they are doing. Then there is that other issue of Jung struggling so visibly, and tensely, with the role of prophet. The idea that becoming a prophet is some simple-minded affair of flying off into ecstasy by escaping the burdens of 292 PART THREE humanity is one of the biggest delusions imaginable. Prophets -- real prophets, genuine prophets -- have always been among the most conflicted, burdened people walking the earth. The Old 'Testament prophets in particular were notorious for opposing rather than meekly accepting their role; for doubting, fighting, resisting, challenging it; for arguing with God. The unbearable tensions between prophetic and anti- prophetic aren't the signs of a failed prophet, or of rejecting the prophetic task. They are among the best proofs of the presence of a true prophet. We may not know this any more, let alone understand it, with our reasonable modern educations or possible Sunday-school brainwashings. But Jung did. As so often, Cary de Angulo hit the nail straight on the head when she wrote to him about the strangely human poignancy in the turmoil of his having tried to the fullest extent possible "to avoid the task the Spirit of the Deep laid upon you, and then when you accepted it" is when the grace finally came. This drama of rejection followed by an always reluctant, if inevitable, acceptance is exactly the reality portrayed and con-. veyed by the Red book. It's also precisely the reality of prophecy.® And as for the result of that acceptance: it could hardly be more obvious. It's Jung's "new book" itself. Strange to say, in all the growing discussions about the purpose of his Red book, no one yet seems to have noticed that he stated exactly what he meant by the idea of a "new book" within the last couple of years before he died. He did so in the context of frankly explaining what, throughout his life, had mattered to him most; talking about the battles he was still engaged in from the core of his being because, behind all the scientific appearances and rhetoric, they defined everything in his existence. THE SUNSET WAY 293 Those battles weren't with other so-called scientists, or even with people working in the field of psychology. They were religious battles against the identical forces of repression that almost two thousand years earlier, with their allegiance to blind faith and belief and dogma, had crushed the Gnostics into non-existence. And it was not as a scientist that he found himself fighting to the very end of his days for the cause of authentic religious experience. Instead it was as an ancient but resurrected Gnostic that, already an old man getting ready to die, he still had the fire in him to challenge the Christian church which mindlessly keeps insisting: "no religious experience please, as the truth has been revealed for all times and God is not supposed to be able to produce a new book after the original edition 2,000 years ago". Defiantly, almost half a century earlier, Jung had played his part in writing that "new book" -- that revised edition, produced by God, of the Holy Bible -- even though he never quite saw the possibility or the rightness of making it public. And as for the crucial question of how on earth such a new book is produced by God, the answer couldn't be simpler. God produces it through his prophets, who do and say not what they want as humans but what the God inside them commands. And so we are brought back to the most basic meaning of the word "prophet" -- which doesn't have anything to do with telling the future. What the word was meant to describe is the person who at any moment in history speaks or writes or communicates faithfully, accurately, without interfering with the process, on behalf of the divine; serves as a mouthpiece to record exactly what the sacred is needing to convey. This is why it's so important to note what happens right at the heart of Jung's "new book", straight after he has been allowed 294 PART THREE to witness the great Mysterium or mystery of his own deification. He walks up to the prophet Elijah, kneels at his feet, and Elijah for his part tells him precisely what he has to do: "Above all, write exactly what you see". Here we have one prophet telling another just what he needs to do as the necessary consequence of accepting his prophetic role. Like any other prophet, he has to write exactly what he has been shown or told. But it also helps to be aware of the way that here, in this scene which just so happens to take place in front of the prophet's house at the base of the volcano leading down to the underworld, Jung is taking his own place inside a much more specific tradition -- one leading back past Dante, past Plato, even past Parmenides to the dimmest beginnings of visionary literature about journeys into the realms of the dead. That's the tradition about the solitary person who manages to go down all the way to the underworld while still alive, only to be told to return as a messenger or prophet to the world of the living so as to report "exactly what you have seen". And, naturally, this has a rather uncomfortable implication. On the surface, nothing could be more reasonable than to assume that Jung's immense labours in accurately documenting every single thing he witnessed or experienced during his archetypal journeys are a living proof of his commendable devotion to the principles of experimental science. Underneath these modern considerations, though, is the very different reality that his commitment to writing everything out with such scrupulous care had nothing to do with science as we understand science. It was simply the result of him accepting his prophetic task, just as it had been accepted by Zoroastrians and Greeks and Gnostics for centuries before his time." Of course that means nothing could be less surprising than the way Jung's language and tone, in his "new book", are already THE SUNSET WAY 295 prophetic right from the start. But what's likely to be a little more surprising is the perfectly logical consequence of this simple fact, provided one cares to look it straight in the eye. For instance, there could be no better or more blatant example of a prophet's language than his scathing denunciation of people -- not just some small group of people but humanity at large, the entire human race -- as "blind and deluded". They "behave like brutes", ignoring what's hidden; trampling the past, neglecting the dead. This sweeping condemnation, this blanket denunciation of humanity as a whole, is the classic style of prophetic revelation. Parmenides in his own time, over two thousand years earlier, spoke exactly the same way. And it's not a question here of rhetorical flourish: the only rhetorical flourish is the ungrounded attempt by commentators to dismiss such revelatory language as no more than a rhetorical flourish. The best one perhaps could hope for would be to find ways of sealing off this Red book from the public, even from the unseasoned eyes of Jungian therapists; of insulating it from his supposedly scientific work. But here is where we come to the heart of the problem -- because Jung's prophetic language isn't restricted to the Red book. It never was. On the contrary: he cries and complains repeatedly about the blindness of humanity throughout his scientific work. And at the conclusion to one of his maturest achievements in the field of psychology he goes well beyond the language of his "new book", portraying the whole of humanity as literally crazy with inflation. But it's still the same basic message, the same intensely urgent tone, the same choice of words. "The masses are blind brutes". The inflated collective consciousness of humanity "is incapable of learning from the past, incapable of understanding contemporary events, and incapable of drawing right conclusions about the future". 296 PART THREE As for trying to reason with that collective consciousness -- to work together in a constructive fashion on some healthy rational approach -- nothing could be more futile. Nothing for Jung could be more pointless, because it actually hypnotizes itself "and therefore cannot be argued with. It inevitably dooms itself to calamities that must strike it dead". Up until the Red book's publication it was easy enough to skip quickly over such passages, in spite of their desperate tone or rather because of it, and turn a blind eye. But the reality is that if you scratch away the scientific fagade of his psychological work, behind the veneer you will find Jung the prophet everywhere. And this is not even to take into account the things he chose to keep out of sight or deliberately hide away -- such as the extent of his indebtedness to the prophetic works of William Blake.® But what matters most is the disturbance caused by this book's undesirability, regardless of whether people rush out excitedly to welcome it with open arms or not. It's a deadly virus, a massive earthquake capable of shaking every rational edifice built up on the work of Jung to the ground; the eruption of something way down inside us which is incalculably destructive of all the tricks we use not only for understanding Jung but to understand ourselves. This is the honest reason why so many people sense his Red book as a danger, however they try to negotiate their fear. What really scares them is not that it reveals a side of Jung quite unrelated to his accepted psychology or science -- even at odds with them. The truly frightening thing is that it forces us to view the task of doing science, or being a psychologist, with the eyes of a prophet. When the corn disappears is when the disaster and the rage arrive -- and this is just what has happened, will happen, with the losses of our knowledge about prophecy. We have come to believe it's all about telling the future. But that's the least part of prophecy because the most important function of prophets, the function from which everything else springs, has always been their ability to tell the past. Even the best-known texts of the Bible show how a prophet is someone with miraculous insight into what has happened already -- not what will happen. And in ancient Greek tradi- tion, too, nothing could possibly be plainer. For a prophet like Empedocles, prototypical psychologist, the first and foremost task was to find the answer to what originally went wrong with humanity that made everything the way it is. The business of prophecy was to enter an ecstatic state of reality that lays bare the "ancient crimes" for which, in our supposedly normal existence, we are still being punished and tormented today. Already at the very start of Homer's I/iad the prophet stands out as the one indispensable figure who can look into the unseen and see who offended the sacred, when, how; what's behind all the sickness and suffering and death unleashed because someone, somewhere, violated divine law. It's the same again with Cassandra, the crazy seer. She was instantly recognized as 298 PART THREE a prophetess not because she was able to say what's going to come in the future, but because her prophetic insight exposed her to the horror of the murders hidden in the past. And one of life's ironies is that sometimes, in spite of himself, even a rationalistic fool like Aristotle will end up getting something right. About the famous prophet Epimenides -- who in a state of incubation used to enter a kind of awareness that was neither sleep nor waking so he could make his way down, just like Jung, to the underworld and have encounters there with divine beings -- he managed to report the essential. "He didn't prophesy about things that will happen in the future but about things that already happened in the past and are unseen, unknown"."' This primordial past is the domain of the prophet as guardian of creation: preserver of nature and protector of life. It's where prophets may have to stick their heads out of now and then, so they can offer some prophecy about the future, because there is no knowing the future without the most intimate knowledge about the past; without first learning how to move freely among the creatures of the past with their untold stories of beauties and horrors, creatures which most people even in their wildest dreams would never imagine are still alive. As a prophet Jung intuited this perfectly, which is why he describes in the Red book what made a prophet of him by using just the words he did: "And so I became a prophet because I found delight in the primordial, in the forest and the wild animals". Gently and so eloquently he says it all -- that to become a prophet means returning deep into the past until you are brushing against the root of yourself, your primordial beginning and ultimate point of origin. But a prophet whose words are noticed and understood is not much of a prophet, because the role of prophets is always to state what the collective awareness of people is not yet able to grasp. THE SUNSET WAY 299 And sure enough, Jung's own statements don't stand a chance because they run so completely contrary to the modern horror of us progressive little Fausts rushing to throw ourselves off the nearest cliff into another non-existent future. It seems only too obvious: his "new book" or testament must be all about the dramatically new and radically improved psychological future we can now look forward to at the solemn dawning of a new age. But so much obviousness can be quite a hindrance to seeing what the Red book is really about. The wonders and terrors it contains are the terror and wonder of our own past, with the dead hanging round our necks. As for the future, at times he is willing to bring us to its brink so we can contemplate the horrors that lie ahead if we can't face the horror that lies behind us; in us. And he also states as clearly as he can: leave the future alone. It's none of your business, never was. As for what our business is then, if we are not in the rationally acceptable position of being able to improve our own future and interfere with the future of others by creating the world we want -- this is the question that propels Jung into one of the most desperate sections of the Red book. His answer is that our only business now as true humans is to give up all our reasoning and rationalizing and go searching, instead, for magic. It's to sacrifice our cravings for comfort, to abandon our illusions of science and submit to the incomprehen- sible, to become Christs by letting ourselves be crucified all alone. It's to face the need to return, in full consciousness, to the primordial point of origin where our own will is suddenly suspended and the mind stops still; to accept the unbearable tension of being transformed, inside the thoughtless awareness of this present moment, into what we always have been. And there is one magical ending to that tension -- although you can count on it coming, absurdly, irrationally, from the one 300 PART THREE place you would have least expected. As for what that resolution is, that saving release: Jung explains it in the most deceptively simple of terms. "Always it's something primordially ancient, and for that very reason it's something new -- because whenever something left behind long ago comes back again into the changed world of today, then it's new. To give birth, inside an age, to the primordially ancient is creation. This is what it means to produce the new; and that's what saves me. Salvation is the solution of the problem, the resolution of the task. The task is to give birth to the old in a new time." In other words: contrary to every single assumption injected into our forward-looking minds, the only thing that's new is what's most ancient. Everything else is nothing but a bluff, a distraction, a waste of time. And far worse, every time we very reasonably fool ourselves into believing we know the future we need, we are blocking our true future and wrecking what needs to be. From any normal or rational point of view, we look into the past to lose ourselves in nostalgia and sentimentality; look into the future to create what's new. But, in reality, we lose ourselves by chasing the future and create what's new by returning into the past. And without the prophets who are willing to take us back to the primordial reality of what we are, we have no future left. Everything else is just a fake, an illusion, a waste of life, because the only real and lasting creation consists of consciously reincarnating what's most ancient -- not even of having to update or streamline or modernize it but of importing it exactly as its essence dictates. Our modern, updated, streamlined world will take care of the rest. That's how our ancestors, whom we may have forgotten although they haven't forgotten us, are respected and welcomed; THE SUNSET WAY 301 is how a genuine historical continuity is assured; is how we stop being passive victims of history but, on the contrary, can consciously bring the past into the present for the sake of the future. And it's the shock of that direct encounter between modern and old which, like the shock of cold water meeting molten iron, creates the new. This is one of the most revealing parts of the Red book -- created with its archaic script, its Latin quotations, its phrases taken from ancient Greek -- not just because it tells the secret of prophecy but because it states what Jung's "new book" is. As he already tried telling Sigmund Freud a few years earlier, the only way to describe the birth of psychology at the dawn of the twentieth century was in terms of reincarnation: as the act of reincarnating the ancient Gnostic wisdom, Sophia, in a modern age. As it happens, even the act of giving birth to the ancient in the new is a Gnostic process. And that act of reincarnation was devotedly inscribed in, portrayed inside, respectfully embodied as the Red book itself. But, of course, if we wanted to limit this process of reincar- nation to some unusual writing inside a single book we once again would be sadly mistaken. And if we wanted to believe that Cary de Angulo was just indulging her personal imagination when she looked on Jung himself as the precious jewel -- the Saoshyant or saviour, the father of all prophets who appears in the world by reincarnating now and then for the sake of humanity -- this would be because we haven't yet understood how to read Carl Jung. Prophets are quite used to hiding their truth out in the open, like some priceless jewel at the marketplace, because they know that our reasonable expectations will make us brush it aside. And this is precisely what Jung does in his Red book, unobserved. 302 PART THREE Time and time again, in the text itself, he addresses Philemon as his father; time after time, Philemon refers to him as his son. But at the top of the single most famous picture in the Red book -- of Philemon with his kingfisher wings spread out -- Jung has clearly written out an explanation of the painting in ancient Greek. Prophéton patér polyphilos Philémén means * Father of prophets, beloved Philemon". Again, on the beautiful mural displaying the same image which he painted upstairs at his private retreat in Bollingen, he added almost the same dedication: also in Greek, also at the top. This time, though, his wording was a little more specific. Instead of the familiar word patér or "father" he used the much rarer expression propatér -- a technical term for the pri- mordial principle hovering behind the whole of creation, the incomprehensible spirit of the depths, which appropriately enough he had taken straight from the ancient Gnostic texts he studied and loved so much. Philémén tin prophétén propatér means "Philemon, primordial father of the prophets". And just below Philemon's left wing Jung has conveniently added the Latin alchemical text in which the spiritual father insists that he and his son are one. Jung is Philemon's son, Philemon is his father, and Philemon is the beloved father of the prophets. There is no need to be some mathematical genius to see where this is leading. In public, Jung could deny he was a prophet as much as he wanted for the sake of keeping his secret secret. But that's only because, in the privacy of his own retreat as well as in the mystery of his unpublished "new book", he was able to state silently and ever so plainly who he was: a prophet, son of the prophets' beloved father.°" After all, this is exactly how prophets speak for those who have eyes to see and ears to hear -- openly stating without seeming to state a thing. And what separates those who take note of the THE SUNSET WAY 303 obvious from those who miss it is what distinguishes those who read Jung with their expectations from those who read him. You will note that he doesn't describe Philemon as "father of the prophet" but is very careful to call him "father of the prophets". And as for who those other prophets are, often in future years he will list the names of his elder brothers. They are Zarathustra, Buddha, Christ, Mani, Muhammad. Or rather, because father and son are really one, it would be better to say that the primordial saviour incarnated three thousand years ago as Zarathustra and since then "he has been Christ, he has been Muhammad, he has been Mani. He went and he came, he died and was born again." He -- the most ancient father of all prophets who reincarnates whenever needed in the shape of the son -- is "the one that goes and the one that comes', returning "only now and then". Periodically he arrives again in the world of today, a "rare phenomenon', the old reappearing in the new. Or according to the language of a passage from the Bhagavad gita which Jung inscribed in his Red book right alongside the picture he had painted of Philemon, as a miniature commentary on it: "Whenever there is a decline of the law and an increase of iniquity, then I put forth myself. For the rescue of the pious and for the destruction of the evildoers, for the establishment of the law I am born in every age." That's not even to mention the different lineages of brothers, sisters too -- the rest of the prophets and saviours, Bodhisattvas and Buddhas, avatars and Saoshyants, all inwardly supporting and reinforcing each other down through the ages." And among them, prophetic son of his prophetic father, Jung discreetly lived with the secret suffering of knowing that he was one. Ten years or so went by from the time when Jung was snatched down into the underworld. Conventional wisdom would have it that everything in his life had returned pretty much to normal. He had regained his balance, nicely integrated the experience, and was back to being a model of serenity: solid rock and example to all. The reality was a little different. Years earlier he had gone in search of his soul, then found her. Now she wouldn't leave him alone. During the first week of 1922 he was noting down the discussions between them. She is explaining that she is totally in charge now. She rules him because she serves him. Or rather, she doesn't serve him personally but serves his calling; his mission. And when he nervously asks what that mission is, her answer is simple. It's to bring a new religion into the world -- then proclaim it. All Jung can do, for his part, is complain. The one issue he complains about more than anything else is, very humanly, his inability to sleep: he works during the day but can't get any rest at night. And she is open enough to admit that already for a long while she deliberately has been keeping him awake, interfering with his sleep, because there are far more important things he needs to be attending to than his day-to-day chores. THE SUNSET WAY 305 Of course myths have to exist, in particular around a personality as commanding as Jung's. People close to him were keen on maintaining the soporific notion that his sleep was blessedly sound, miraculously deep, because no one could be more at peace with the unconscious than he was. That's only a part of the truth, though. The fact is that as soon as he started writing, young or old, the first thing likely to go out of the window was his sleep. When he was meant to write but didn't, he got sick to the point where he couldn't get any rest; when he did write, the process was often so intense that he couldn't sleep either. From the moment that the daimon inside him took over, whatever its name, his nights were no longer his own." One of the blessings that did stay with him during those early years of the 1920s was the chance to talk about his experiences honestly, directly, intelligently with the woman he had come to trust so much -- Cary de Angulo. On a winter's day in January 1924 they sat together. And this is what, based on her memory of their discussion, she would later write down with that quality of preciseness he valued her for so highly: Jung, she noted, informed her he had just dreamed the previous night that she was to help him with the Red book. Faithful to his dream, he already had decided to hand everything over and explain the entire material to her as completely as he could so that she and she alone would be able to understand each of his ideas from "the foundation". He described how painful the process of writing, even of painting, was; how mad it all seemed; the difficulties he found himself surrounded by. And in her meticulous style she went on to record his account of what was really happening with the Red book, reciting his own explanations back to him. "There were various figures speaking, Elias, Father Phile- mon, etc. but all appeared to be phases of what you thought ought to be called 'the master'. You were sure that this latter 306 PART THREE was the same who inspired Buddha, Mani, Christ, Mahomet -- all those in fact who may be said to have communed with God. But the others had identified with him. You absolutely refused to. It could not be for you, you said, you had to remain the psychologist -- the person who understood the process. | said then that the thing to be done was to enable the world to understand the process also without their getting the notion that they had the master caged as it were at their beck & call. They had to think of him as a pillar of fire perpetually moving on, and forever out of human grasp. Yes, you said it was something like that. Perhaps it cannot yet be done. As you talked I grew more and more aware of the immensity of the ideas which are filling you. You said they had the shadow of eternity upon them and I could feel the truth of it." Overwhelmed, she added that she didn't see herself as being in any way capable of really helping him with the gigantic task he had taken on." Of the various names here, many will already be more or less familiar: Philemon father of prophets, the prophet Elias or Elijah, the other prophet Mahomet or Muhammad, Buddha and Christ. But the one name that, strangely enough, may sound strange is the name of Mani. I say "strangely enough" because, of all these names, in a way his almost deserves to be known best. Jung, for sure, knew perfectly well who Mani was. He had been an extraordinary prophet and healer and painter, born in Babylonia about two hundred years after Christ, who founded an immensely sophisticated world religion known as the Manichaean religion which was to take root from the western edges of Europe right across Asia into China -- before being systematically wiped out by Christians, Buddhists, Zoroastrians as perhaps the most potent and terrifying form of Gnosticism that ever existed. THE SUNSET WAY 307 Coming on for two thousand years before the new-age movement even saw the light of day, Mani had not only claimed he was bringing together in his own mission the most essential teachings of Buddha; of Christ; of every other prophet, including Zarathustra, who had lived before him. He also proclaimed himself as the fulfiller and completer, as the one true successor and superseder of all their wisdoms: as the Seal of Prophets. At the same time, and very consciously in the mould of older figures like Empedocles, Mani presented himself not just as a saviour and prophet and healer -- but as a scientist, too, with a detailed insight into the workings of the world and of the human psyche which only the direct experience granted through revelation can ever hope to provide. Carl Jung, for his own part, was fascinated by Mani's amazingly intricate explanations of the physical world; followed the unearthing of Manichaean manuscripts, by German archaeologists at Turfan in Central Asia, with riveted attention; warmly praised Mani for his skills not just as the founder of a world religion but as a wonderful painter."* And here he is, late on a January afternoon in Zurich, comparing himself to a series of these prophets and saviours. Understandably enough, for a minute you might have started wondering what on earth he is up to -- referring to himself in one and the same breath right alongside an entire list of redeemers, prophets, fathers of prophets. Then comes the word to conjure with, the golden key to our peace of mind: identify. And it only takes a moment for everything to fall neatly into place. All those prophets whom Jung might seem at first glance to be comparing himself to had made the crucial mistake of identifying themselves with "the master'. He, on the other hand, "absolutely refused to. It could 308 PART THREE not be for you, you said, you had to remain the psychologist -- the person who understood the process." The magic spell has been broken. Once again, with his grand gesture of disidentification we can breathe easily and sleep even easier. Here he is, once more, the man we know and trust and feel safe with: the pragmatic psychologist, the sensible scientist who with a sceptical wave of his hand can leave all that prophetic nonsense behind. But of course, if you pay attention, you will see that no spell was broken. And Jung has left absolutely nothing behind. That act of disidentification has done nothing whatsoever to get rid of "the master". On the contrary, it brings us up very close to a man aching to help people understand how much they needed to get rid of any notion that "they had the master caged as it were at their beck and call". What he wanted was for them to let him be free, allow him to move freely -- which is why Jung and Cary de Angulo both found themselves discussing this same master a week later and agreeing to describe him as a titanic being who, striding across the universe, transcends the whole world. And here, it's all about learning to'see him "as a pillar of fire perpetually moving on" just outside of human reach. Needless to say, this pillar of fire isn't some image arbitrarily picked out of nowhere. Biblically, it was the mystery of the divine presence itself: the living God who, every night, would appear to the chosen people to guide them through the desolation of the wilderness. But, significantly enough, the pillar of light or fire also happens to have been a symbol of immense importance in Manichaean tradition as well as for Jung -- symbol of the complete human being, of the perfected prophet." THE SUNSET WAY 309 And as for Jung himself, what we are left with is not the reductive theorizing of some calculating psychologist. Instead, nothing remains except for the image of a man left face to face with the sheer immensity of living directly underneath the shadow of eternity; and in those eternal darknesses there are so many impossible things just waiting to be done by the being who, as Cary de Angulo realized, is a jewel precisely because he doesn't identify with being a jewel. In other words: if you care to look at what was happening, are interested enough to read sentence by sentence what our text is saying, you will see what the effect of Jung's psychological disidentification actually is. It's the same story as before -- all over again. It's not about disposing of the archetypes and making them vanish. It's about consciously setting them free; about helping them as only a human can, through the non-inflation of non-identification, to carry on with doing their real work in the world. What might have sounded such utter heresy, because it flies straight in the face of every reasonable therapeutic mentality, is no heresy at all. Disidentifying from the archetypal realities was never just about keeping our human psychology uncontaminated and pure. It's also about keeping the archetypal realities pure and uncontaminated by us. Mani, Christ, Muhammad, Buddha, Zarathustra: they all did the best they possibly could. The only problem is that even to accept and identify with the role of prophet or saviour is to corrupt it. And if you still want to think I am talking heresy I'll simply have to prove you wrong by quoting from one of Jung's most famous seminars. "Zarathustra was a saviour, the great teacher, just as good as Christ or Mani or Muhammad or any of the great prophets. But if a human being identifies with that figure, there is an 310 PART THREE admixture of human psychology, and it is due to this mixture with human imperfection that the face of Zarathustra appears like the face of a devil ... is no longer pure."" This, if you like, is Jungian psychology not from the merely human but from the sacred point of view. And now, if we dare to watch, we can start to see the grand trick being played out behind all the fine-sounding talk about being a humble psychologist; nothing but a scientist. The human work of learning how to disidentify from the archetypes was always inspired by something more than purely human. From the very start, Jungian therapy was never meant to be just another therapy in the modern sense of being about me and me and me: it was about the serapeia of serving, and caring for, the divine. Behind their exterior there is far more to Jung's professional role as a psychologist, his respectable scientific job, than meets the eye. They stop him from identifying, getting inflated, puffed up. They allow him to stay grounded in this world, modest, objective, critical especially of himself -- and do the work of a true mystic. This is a paradox we have been forbidden in the West to remember, hardly allowed even to understand. It's a paradox that his friend Henry Corbin was to become well acquainted with, thanks to those Sufis who had kept the teachings of Empedocles and other Presocratics alive in the East. Mysticism alone is just useless gush; but, trained to work together, mystical experience and a scientific attitude become the two wings of a single bird. Someone full of mystical beliefs can perhaps at best be considered a third-rate mystic, just as a scientist full of reasonable assumptions and firm convictions is a scientific fool. Real mysticism is to abandon any possible identification and, from moment to moment, surrender everything -- which is why scepticism is the most mystical attitude of all. THE SUNSET WAY 311 One has to be infinitely cautious, though; be endlessly sceptical about one's scepticism; constantly remember to doubt one's own doubt. People who like to call themselves sceptics are mostly just superficial compromisers who settle on a little patch of scepticism that attracts them because they are afraid of going further. But true scepticism, followed to its logical conclusion, grows into what Jung himself called the "greatest doubt" and leads straight to the secret of life." In other words his famous psychology, his much vaunted science, had a mystical goal all along. Here, more than anywhere else, is where the scientist son is reunited and perfectly conjoined with the mystical father. Or to state the matter just a little less discreetly, his science and psychology are serving a prophetic purpose -- carrying the great work of prophecy forward, leading the lineage of prophets and saviours one step further into the future. And that brings us right back again to his discussion with Cary de Angulo. There happens to be something in what he tells her that anybody nowadays is almost bound to skip over without noting its significance. In fact only someone as familiar with Gnostic or Manichaean literature as Jung himself was would ever recognize it. But it's not just a question of what he says. It's even a matter of the subtleties inside the way he says it. At a certain point he makes the impressive claim that the supreme master inspiring his work on the Red book "was the same who inspired Buddha, Mani, Christ, Mahomet -- all those in fact who may be said to have communed with God". He was unlike all those older prophets, though, because in one crucial respect he has left them behind: has learned the absolute need no longer to identify. In other words he is just like them on one fundamental level and on another, equally important level has gone beyond them. 312 PART THREE But what's not nearly so obvious is that this very same double claim lies right at the heart of Manichaean as well as Gnostic traditions. In a certain sense it even defines them. First, the newest prophet in the latest generation takes care to list the names of his major predecessors: there was a general fondness for listing the names of prophets in groups of four. He also has to make sure to state that the source of his own inspiration is the same as, is identical to, the source that inspired all those who came before. And then he is confronted with the need to explain how he has gone beyond every one of his distinguished predecessors -- how he is not just continuing their work but taking it to another level altogether by adding his own, unique contribution. That's what it means to be carrying the lineage of prophets to the next stage, to fulfil and complete their work at the same time as totally transforming it: to become, in oneself, the Seal of Prophecy. This is just what Mani did, for his own time and age. Perhaps I should mention that two of the ways he chose to advance beyond those who had gone before him were by deciding to paint his revelations, as well as write them; and by consciously coming to grips with the fact that the major culprits always responsible for destroying any revealed religion by already subverting it within the space of a single generation are not, as one might suppose, its obvious competitors or enemies. It's the devoted apostles, followers, disciples." And in repeating the identical formality this is exactly what Jung does, too. Even while outwardly he is presenting himself as a psychologist, inwardly he is doing something else. At the same precise moment as he seems to be announcing how modern he is, he is revealing how ancient he is in his deepest mode of thought. He is talking just the same way Mani did. He is speaking as a Gnostic. THE SUNSET WAY 313 It still might sound a little strange to hear someone pointing to such an intimate connection between one of the most influential figures in the twentieth century and a forgotten heretic called Mani. But the fact is that, whether we want to notice or not in this record of a winter's conversation, the early 1920s would find Jung taking the pages right out of Mani's book: reading straight from Mani's script. And it's no coincidence that four years earlier, at the start of the year 1920, he had a major dream in Tunisia about one particular book -- the book which he came to realize would be "absolutely essential" in giving him the power to confront, and ultimately master, the overwhelming daimonic forces of the unconscious. It was a book which, in his dream, gave him the extraordinary sense that "this was 'my book', that I had written it". If he could only hold on to that sense, he knew he would find inside its pages whatever strength he needed for commanding and befriending the archetypal realities beyond his conscious reach. But as for what this book, Jung's own book, looked like: with its magnificent calligraphy on milky -- white parchment it wasn't written in a European script, not even in Arabic. "Rather, it looked to me like the Uigurian script of West Turkestan, which was familiar to me from the Manichaean fragments from Turfan."" This book of his, so uniquely written not just for him alone but by him alone -- the book of his own psychology which would allow him to understand and even make friends with the unconscious -- is at the same time the writing produced by Mani and Mani's followers. Once again, the language of Jung is the language of Mani. As for that intricate script he has been shown, the script of the unconscious so many others will soon be trying so hard to decipher: it isn't European or Arab or African. 314 PART THREE In its quintessential form it's the script of ancient heretics; the calligraphy of the Manichees. Exactly the same as emerges with such revealing detail in that discussion between him and Cary de Angulo, the prophet Mani with his searing teaching about light and darkness has got deep underneath his skin. And in spite of every appearance to the contrary, Jung's magnificently scripted psychology wasn't some solitary creation. On the contrary, it was simply the new religion that his soul once hinted he would be bringing to the world -- the latest, most updated, most freshly reincarnated method of salvation. For us today, in spite of his earlier comments to Freud about creating a religion which would replace Christianity, nothing could be more tempting than to dodge or reject outright that terrifying statement by Jung's soul about a new religion and its proclamation. But while this may be the way we treat our souls, it's not the way he treated his; and, in reality, some things don't ever go away or become unsaid." He definitely might, almost certainly would, reject the literal and crude interpretation of what she does say -- because the entire point of his psychology was to work towards finding its innermost meaning. This is precisely the reason why, in line with his Gnostic dedication to direct experience, he would never be the founder of some cult with set dogmas or creeds. After all, even Christ never had any intention of creating an outer religion. But it's also why he would repeatedly tell those who worked with him that they and he belonged to an "invisible church": to a "secret church", free of any outer rules, which exists behind and beyond every visible or formal institution. And so Jung would present himself to the world as a man with a mission but no mission; as a mystic without being a THE SUNSET WAY 315 mystic. He would be the bringer of a message but no message, in the same way that he was both a prophet and a saviour without being either. As for his whole psychology, far from serving to dispose of prophetic traditions it was itself the purest of offerings at the altar of prophecy. And, although he felt unable to say very much except to the closest or most trusted of colleagues, in reality his science was exactly the same as Mani's science -- or Empedocles' science. It, too, was prophecy and revelation through and through: a science designed to let the presence of God become even more present by allowing the prophetic role to fulfil itself, without any contamination or identification, in the modern world. Right at the start of the Red book Jung states that according to the spirit of this time there can be no justification, or defence, for the things he is going to say. No, that's not good enough and I need to be more precise. In the very first sentence of the Red book he admits that -- if he was to speak in the spirit of this time -- nothing whatsoever and absolutely no one would be able to justify the message he has to proclaim. "Verktinden" is his word for proclaim; but it's also a word that means, as it most certainly does here, both preach and prophesy. And so, from the opening sentence, Jung is presenting him- self as a prophet with a mission and a message to convey. In the same spirit, according to the same logic, I realize there can be no possible justification for documenting his unadorned experience of the relationship between prophecy and science -- because this is the very last thing that on the surface of our collective existence we want to hear. But here, based on his own exquisitely consistent accounts which stretch across almost fifty years, is what he said: The spirit of the depths wanted him. Even though he had the personal and overpowering sense of needing to keep going deeper inside himself, the reality is that it was needing him. THE SUNSET WAY 317 It tore him away from everything including any reassurance of sanity -- shattered all his childish attachment to worldly wisdom and science. Next, it forced him to serve as its mouthpiece and speak on its behalf; overcame his resistance through the mystery of its grace; compelled him to write what it was so urgently and timelessly needing to convey to the world of humans. "Glad" every day "to have escaped from death", he was helpless in the face of this primordial spirit's overwhelming power: amazed it hadn't crushed him already. And he had absolutely no choice. If he held off on writing down what needed recording, refused to say what had to be said, automatically he'd be robbed of his ability to speak on behalf of anything or anybody else; robbed of any joy; robbed of any life. His one and only hope was that just by obeying, by writing down exactly everything he had been shown and whatever he'd been told, he would be released from his ordeal -- freed from the prophetic task. But he wasn't freed at all. And slowly he learned the central lesson already learned by that favourite figure he was always glad to keep in mind: Odysseus. After each ordeal comes the next ordeal. There was a part of him, the human part we all know so well, that simply couldn't stand what he was being forced to do. The crude, raw reality of having a prophetic mission turned his stomach; revolted him with its repulsive aura of unconscious pretentiousness. As for the grand prophetic language of what he was being made to write, its bombastic archetypal style, working with it was like sheer agony and torture. He knew very well he had his message and mission, his "Botschaft" as he called it in German, which he was needing to bring to the world: the prophetic task he had been given by the spirit of the depths and that he soon came to realize, beyond 318 PART THREE any doubt or question, would never be taken away. He was perfectly aware that trying to abandon it wouldn't just make his life worthless. It would kill him. But he also knew the language he was using for this message wasn't the right one -- and he was going to have to find another. So, gradually, he started understanding that to stand any chance at all of getting the message across he was going to have to make his way back from the world of the depths to the human side of reality. He would need to find solid ground again under his feet, which in his case would mean returning to the world of science with its seemingly solid methods; its firm conclusions. In other words, the next ordeal was to be a task of trans- lation: was to set about translating his prophetic message into the language of science." Of course he wasn't the first person to have to complete this archetypal return from the realms of the gods, and the dead, to the land of the living. Two and a half thousand years earlier both Parmenides and Empedocles found themselves having to adapt, after their own underworld journeys, to living and speaking again as more or less ordinary people by very consciously re-adopting the normal human conventions -- above all to translating their experiences of a reality beyond anything human into a familiar, everyday language which anyone could understand and which would contribute to the science of their times. But one of the points most worth noting about their returns from the world of the gods to what Jung would later describe as the "human side" is that this wasn't something they had to try and work out by themselves. Quite to the contrary: very visibly, in Parmenides' case, it was the divine that took care of everything. And for Empedocles, together with Parmenides, the one decisive factor that made it possible for them to return effectively THE SUNSET WAY 319 as prophets to the world of humans was the divine reality called meétts. Métis is the ability to adapt, translate, shift shape; is the instinctive inner wisdom that can steer a consistent course for us across the constantly changing waters of existence; is the infinite subtlety and alertness that's needed to make the impossible transition successfully, faithfully, exactly from one level of reality to another; is the cunning of knowing how to keep concealed and disguised while revealing no more than is appropriate at any moment. Above all, though, métis is the supreme art of trickery and deception in a world that's full of deceit and tricks. Naturally to us modern, well-adapted humans nothing could sound more absurd than to think of someone's successful return to the warm and safe and solid world of humans as a deception. But that's only because in our collective, inflated, unquestion- ing identification with the human condition we never experience what it actually means to fall under the archetypal spell of becoming human. Neither have we probably ever experienced what it feels like to be snatched away from all that's human by a power far greater than oneself and forced to leave the world of humanity behind -- before eventually being forced to return. This return is never an easy matter. And to understand just a little of what the process involves, it's enough to think of that mythical figure who already was so familiar even before the time of Parmenides or Empedocles. When Odysseus finds his exhausted way back, at long last, to the seemingly safe and solid world of his own home he doesn't rush straight ahead to embrace his wife. Every single detail is going to need a great deal of calculation. And the first thing he does after his enormous sufferings and losses, his horrific aloneness, his journey into the underworld as well as all his other magical ordeals, is to face the next ordeal. 320 PART THREE Now he has to disguise himself and, of course with divine assistance, pretend to be a beggar. For Empedocles, as well as Parmenides, the situation is just the same. As they both keep emphasizing, and as somehow keeps slipping the keen minds of their modern commentators, the use they are going to have to make of human language will be sheer cloaking and deception and disguise. It couldn't possibly be otherwise -- because as soon as you come back to the human side and start talking to people in their own language, the only thing they are going to hear is the hum of their familiar words and concepts. All they are going to see when they look at you is their own humanness and mundanity reflected back to them, which is simply to say that your translation was a great success. You have translated so well from the language of the dead into its mirror opposite, the language of the living, it never once occurs to them that all the time you are actively translating from something else. You don't have to trick or mislead anyone, because people are so excited at the sight of their own reflection that they are delighted to deceive themselves. And this, unnoticed, is just what happened with Carl Jung. Almost the funniest part of it all is that there haye been several times when popular writers suggested he was no ordi- nary scientist but -- on the contrary -- nothing but a prophet in disguise masquerading as a scientist. Of course the reactions haven't been nearly as amusing, or amused, and those who claim to know and understand most about Jung will have absolutely none of it. If he says he is a scientist then he is simply a scientist and that's the end of the story. What's even funnier, though, is the way Jung lays his own cards so plainly on the table but so few people care to look. It's not just a matter, either, of those explicit comments he makes towards the end of his life about how the whole of his THE SUNSET WAY 321 work consisted of one single need: the need to translate the prophetic message he had been given by the spirit of the depths into the language of science. There are also the equally clear statements he made when he was far younger, going out of his way to explain that "today the voice of one crying in the wilderness must necessarily strike a scientific tone if the ear of the multitude is to be reached". Needless to say, this voice of one crying in the wilderness is a direct appeal to language once used by the prophet Isaiah -- and this comment of Jung's could hardly be more to the point, consid- ering his own awareness that today any real prophets or saviours who announce themselves to the public as prophets or saviours will be destroyed by our modern world in a matter of weeks.* In other words: the prophet who puts on the princely, or beggarly, disguise of being a scientist isn't a failed prophet but an extremely intelligent prophet. And so at long last we arrive again at the same passage I already touched on earlier, which has been buried under more than its fair share of random misunder- standings; wilful misinterpretations; arbitrary mistranslations. But, as Empedocles already said a long while ago, what's worth mentioning once is worth mentioning twice. This is the passage dating from the 1* of October 1957, when Jung was talking openly at Bollingen about those original experiences of his from which first the Red book and then all his later work would flow. A question had happened to come up about the enormous difference in style between his published works -- which of course didn't include the Red book at that time -- and the spontaneous accounts he was willing to offer of his dreams or inner life. And his answer, as recorded by his secretary, was to talk about lava. Those dreams and inner experiences, he explains, are the primordial substance underlying everything. But to describe his published books he evokes the image of a creator god busy 322 PART THREE producing order out of chaos and explains them as simply an attempt to shape this primordial material, this seething volcanic lava, into some kind of orderly cosmos. Then he goes straight on to add that "it was the passion and intensity inside this fire, it was the stream of lava itself which is the force that compelled whatever happened to happen. And so, completely naturally, everything fell into its own proper place and order." But almost as if he knows he won't be heard, and in the dim hope of preventing any misunderstanding, he takes the trouble a moment later to repeat himself: "I wanted to achieve something in my science, and then I bumped into this stream of lava, and then it brought everything into order." We have already seen how well that attempt to avoid any misunderstandings worked out -- and how the only two people who took it upon themselves to translate this passage both totally distorted its meaning. But, again, nothing is more important than to understand that these mistranslations aren't just a matter of accidents or technical errors. And it's time now to be a little clearer about what's really involved. What Jung is actually doing is, in one fell swoop, cancelling out our human language as well as all our normal understand- ings of ourselves or the world around us. We assume we are the ones who shape and create some order out of the primitive lava. Always we talk not only to others, but also to ourselves, as if we are the ones responsible for making something out of the rough rock and stone of existence. But it's all done through us, for us. In fact we don't do a thing because, thanks to a divine process we can't or wont acknowledge, it's the sacred that takes care of everything. And in case you want to argue with this as any normal human has to, in case you feel the need to misinterpret it as any rational THE SUNSET WAY 323 person is obliged to do, I will quote another passage -- from a seminar Jung had given over twenty years earlier -- to show how far am from making anything up. He had been talking, in the seminar, about the archetypal reality of the unconscious and how ambiguous it is. It's the source of life but also the source of all destruction and death. And our own skill as humans is what determines, or at least seems to determine, whether we are able successfully to navigate a course for ourselves over the turbulent waters of the unconscious. This -- he explains -- is why every single religious system in existence has been built, with such care, as a ship which will offer people the specific kind of wisdom they so deeply need for navigating a path through the elementary dangers of life. But then, sure enough, he comes to the crux at the heart of the paradox. Quite obviously, unquestionably, it's the skill of humans that brings everything together and creates such sophisticated systems. And yet the very obviousness of this is, precisely, the biggest trap. To believe that we, ourselves, bring anything together is just a delusion. To claim that our own skills are responsible for producing such systems, or creating anything else, is to make the most hopelessly inadequate statement. It's nothing but our thoughtlessly conventional human language -- 'the ordinary language" we use in assuming that we are the inventors of things, that Moses invented the laws he brought, that Christ and the Old Testament prophets were kind and good-hearted folk who came up on their own initiative with suitable ways for helping their people. But the problem with this whole grand narrative, Jung insists, is that it doesn't come anywhere near to explaining the real facts. And the real facts are that all these methods and techniques for building ships are not human "inventions, but are revelations". They are "a revealed truth or a perceived truth which has been 324 PART THREE thought before man has thought. Before I had that thought it had already been thought, and I merely happened to perceive it once in time; it has been there since eternity, is always there, has always lived, and I just happened in a certain moment to perceive it." Of course that briefest moment of perception, that little glimpse we are allowed to have as humans into the thinnest slice of reality without ever managing to see the whole, is what leads straight into inflation. Suddenly the little human is saying: Look what I saw, look what I invented and discovered, look at all the things I can do and know! And then, needless to say, you are behaving exactly the same as any other unconscious person. Inwardly, though, "you are absolutely done for' -- because in your ordinary arrogance you have wiped out any trace of "the revelation of the thought that existed before man had the thought". Now you just have perfectly human religion, completely human science. And the reality of that revelation is gone.® So, here again, Jung is moving in a direction few people are even able to notice; let alone are willing to go. Most of us are, quite frankly, desperate to rescue him from his early days of prophecy and revelation: to restore him to the role of a respectable scientist tinkering with his human remedies for this problem or that. But here he is, again, pointing everything back to the reality of revelation -- to that timeless, primordial revelation which has existed "since eternity". The trouble is, though, that this reality isn't a theoretical concept or something to understand with the mind. On the contrary: there is only one possible way to approach it which is when it's directly seen, and experienced, as a reality. And the direct vision of this pre-existent eternity is the one THE SUNSET WAY 325 thing able to save us from drowning in the impossible paradox that even our skill at navigating the waters of the unconscious is, itself, a skill given to us by the unconscious. As for what this means, the implications are very simple. Whenever you hear Jung talking about himself, or read him offering his human assurances about this and that, make sure you have enough méris or alertness not to believe him. Whenever he discusses the things we have to do and achieve to become conscious, avoid problems, grow up, don't believe that either because he is only using a convenient kind of shorthand. He is just using the conventional human language which, he is quick to admit, is totally inadequate. This is the problem with returning to the human side -- because to become a whole human means having to learn how to deceive and be deceived. As he states the matter with such clarity, to create the possibility of being understood by humans means using "the ordinary language" which automatically pulls down a veil over eternal truth; hides the revelation. Or as Empedocles, for his part, had already gone to such lengths to explain: the ordinary language used by humans turns reality upside down and back to front, magically obliterates the timeless truth of what we are. But, just like Jung, he had absolutely no choice and was forced to add nomdéi d' epiphémi kai autos. "1, too, conform to convention."* For anyone involved in this process of return to the human side it's a completely hopeless situation -- from the human point of view. You have to take a stand against human conventions and refuse to conform because this is the only way to balance or correct the massive ignorance they contain. But if you blindly refuse to conform, you are lost. You have to be ready and flexible enough to adapt. But if you make a deliberate attempt to adapt by consciously compromising, 326 PART THREE as any sane or reasonable person would recommend, again you are lost because you sacrificed your own integrity together with the essential wildness of your message. And then, as always, there is the forgotten third alternative -- which in this particular case is to stand back and let the unconscious itself do the adapting, is to allow the flowing lava with its own divine métis to do precisely what's right. The result will be completely baffling to any human observer: a riddle that defies every attempt at some sensible understanding and for which, ultimately, there can be no rational defence or justification at all. Still, whether in the middle of people or alone, you will be impossibly lonely. At least you will have the satisfaction, though, of knowing that your real work is being done for you. And in the case of Jung, all his apparently conscious choices had been made for him already by the unconscious -- even the choice of scientific language for translating his prophetic message into, even the particular design of the disguise or costume he was going to have to put on. Even the cloak he would use to cover the raw power of the unconscious was selected for him by the unconscious itself. And everything his ego would so normally, so effortlessly but so foolishly take the credit for had already been taken care of on his behalf. But then there is the rest of what he said on October the 1", 1957. Just before emphasizing for the second time that he doesn't deserve any personal credit for his life's achievements, that everything fell naturally and quite spontaneously into place thanks to the unconscious flow of lava inside him, Jung makes a sudden confession about himself: "I'm the damnedest dilettante who ever lived. I wanted to achieve something in my science, and then I bumped into this stream of lava, and then it brought everything into order." And here, as so often, we are faced with a simple choice. We either go on fabricating our collective fantasies, keep weaving our reasonable myths about what he meant -- or we work our way down with him to the truth of what he actually said.® As it happens, Jung goes straight on to explain why he has just dismissively called himself a damned dilettante. By this, he says, he means he has spent the whole of his life borrowing other people's knowledge. To be sure, a little of what he did was original. But in everything else, the material he used for creating and building up his psychology didn't come from his own being; didn't have its source in the raw primal substance, the primordial prophetic material, flowing deep inside him. 328 PART THREE Instead he took it all from outside, grabbed pieces from here, snatched bits from there. Regardless of every appearance to the contrary, he didn't really create anything himself but just dabbled in this or that like any other dilettante. And that, he adds while being interviewed by his secretary at the Bollingen tower, is exactly what happened in the case of his involvement with alchemy. His work on alchemical tradition was never an inner experience for him: he simply snatched and grabbed whatever he happened to find outside. Year after year he read books, then more books, searching for some kind of material that would allow him to cloak and cover the "primordial revelation" he had received -- the "Uroffenbarung", as he called it -- which by himself he was completely unable to master or cope with.*° As far as Jung is concerned, there arent many things that are more important to understand. A few weeks later he would also mention to his secretary how extraordinary it was to discover that his experiences, during the time of his critical descent into the unconscious, were the same as the experiences of the alchemists and the other way around. But the fact of this simple correspondence, stated by him here so clearly, isn't what mattered most. What's even more significant is the fact that in writing about their experiences he was actually covering over and hiding his own. Jung loved complaining as well as exaggerating. And when the sheer amount of work involved in tracking all the intricate details of alchemical tradition weighed him down, he enjoyed groaning to the people around him that this ordeal of researching and writing about alchemy was causing him far more pain and trouble than anything he'd had to suffer during his earlier ordeal of descending alive into the underworld. Of course to those helpers of his who hadn't made the journey to hell -- and were THE SUNSET WAY 329 happy for the most part to see with his eyes, live through his experiences -- it was irresistibly tempting to take him at his word. But, at the same time, there is an element of truth in his complaint. His terrifying ordeal of travelling down into his innermost depths was a task of stripping everything away so as to open himself to his own naked, primordial, eternally solitary, prophetic reality. Then his enormous, years-long ordeal of studying alchemy was the task of covering that reality over once again. As a covering, it couldn't have been more appropriate -- because one aspect of alchemical tradition which has strangely been overlooked, although Jung himself was well aware of the fact, is that from the very beginning western alchemists viewed their tradition as prophetic. So even when he was translating his prophetic message, cloaking his prophetic mission, he made sure to select a prophetic tradition to complete the task; or, rather, let it be chosen for him. Still, though, that precious alchemy of his was no more than a covering: a disguise.®' And this is just what his science would be for him. It's what he himself called a "Bekleidungsstoff"' -- a cloaking material to cover and disguise what was most important. Many people feel a huge sense of victory, not to mention relief, because he finally grew up; slammed the door shut on his immature silliness about prophecy; managed to "find his true life's work" by shaking that nonsense off and abandoning it definitively in favour of science. But while these explanations might seem valid enough if you are just looking at the reflective surface of things, the reality is that Jung didn't abandon anything. He simply covered it over, decked it out, disguised what was most essential. In the early days of his naive ambition, when he still wanted to achieve something for himself through science and hadn't yet bumped into that stream of lava, he already had plenty of 330 PART THREE doubts and reservations about becoming a scientist. Even so, he immersed himself wholeheartedly in the scientific world and began to see it as his future and destiny. And his encounter with the lava took all that away: took away his belief in science, took away his heart. From then on, it was just a matter of snatch and grab -- of playing the role of dilettante not because he enjoyed being a dilettante or wanted to become a better dilettante, but because now his heart was somewhere else. In fact, on the most obvious level, a dilettante is precisely what Jung became. He turned here, drifted there; let himself get dragged into grand new projects and schemes only to abandon them, often causing the other people involved a vast amount of trouble and frustration, in midstream. All the time through the science he had his eye on something beyond the science, and everyone who didn't share his vision simply couldn't see what was going on.®® For instance, there is what now has become one of his most famous scientific ideas: the theory of synchronicity. After he had died, the leading British Jungian Michael Fordham proudly presented it to the English-speaking world as Jung's successful attempt "to strip off the fantasy, magic and superstition which surround and are provoked by unpredictable, startling and impressive events" and show that "they are simply 'meaningful coincidences". But the fact is that Jung's theory of synchronicity wasnt aimed at "simply" anything; and certainly, whatever anyone might like to think, it wasn't aimed at stripping out magic. Quite to the contrary, Jung himself had made it abundantly clear what he was wanting to offer with his idea of synchronicity. He was presenting to the world an updated, reincarnated version of the ancient magical theory known as sympatheia -- the occult western tradition of "sympathies" or correspondences which THE SUNSET WAY 331 happens to be traceable back all the way to Empedocles and was always understood as revealing the mysterious hand of God, the magical insertion of the timeless into time. And rather than wanting to strip such mumbo jumbo away so as to make synchronicity scientifically respectable, his real aim was to achieve almost the exact reverse through the most elegant act of sabotage: to plant a bombshell inside the scientific consciousness that would shake it to the core, to strip away scientists' pretensions by rupturing the fabric not just of time but of contemporary science itself, to drag the modern rational mind right to the border of what's acceptable or possible only to push it into the unknown. Beyond everything else, though, his central concern was not to create and then promote one more scientific theory. Instead, it was to shock people out of their mental complacency into a direct experience of the fullness -- the Gnostic p/éréma -- that lies at the root of our being. This primordial experience, as he passionately explained to those who were willing to listen, is where his idea came from. And this is where it was supposed to lead back to again." So everything comes back to what lies behind his science; what hides below it. In other words, there is not the slightest chance of understanding what Jung actually means when he talks about his scientific dilettantism without relating it straight to what he calls his "Uroffenbarung": the "primordial revelation", so overwhelmingly real and powerful and alive, that was flowing deep inside him at the core of his whole being. There is nothing at all accidental about his choice of such a striking expression. "Uroffenbarung" is a word that already had been used in the German language for years to describe the existence of direct divine revelation outside of Christianity, or before Christianity -- a kind of revelation open and accessible to prophets anywhere, everywhere, since the beginning of time. 332 PART THREE Of course anyone can talk about such primordial revelation as a matter of theory. But the actual access to that timeless reality belongs to prophets alone while the only traces of it, as a direct experience, are to be found in prophets' lives. And thanks to the markings he left inside his books we can still see how closely Jung associated this notion of primeval revelation, as well as the word "Uroftenbarung" itself, with one prophetic lineage in particular. That was the lineage of the Gnostics -- and especially of the prophet Mani."" Once again, everything fits perfectly into place on every possible level. Jung not only saw himself, inwardly, as a prophet. He was also able to situate that prophetic role in a far broader perspective not just spiritually, but historically too. And then there is the coherence, equally perfect, of the picture that emerges from those late interviews he gave -- as duly noted and recorded, day after day, by his devoted secretary -- during the proverbial winter of his life. Every word and expression Jung used, towards the end of 1957, has its proper place and function and logic. The unique access he was given to primordial revelation, to "Uroffenbarung'", is the crucial factor that unavoidably forced on him his "Botschaft": his prophetic mission and message to the world which had already been announced from the very first sentence of his Red book. Or to rephrase that in slightly more human terms, he was unable to master or manage or cope with the sheer wild power of this "Uroffenbarung' -- which he ended up having to wrap inside the cloak of science -- in exactly the same way and for precisely the same reasons that he was unable to tolerate the raw prophetic message he had been handed, and which he ended up having to translate into the language of science. THE SUNSET WAY 333 Now it should be ever so easy to understand why the point had to come when Jung would give up his work on the Red book so that he could start working away at the study of alchemy instead. And at the same time we can understand why he never published the Red book as long as he stayed alive -- because it contained the raw, prophetic material he couldn't handle by himself but worked so skilfully to cover over and disguise. Of course that wild destructive power is something no human can ever manage or cope with, which is why Jung couldn't hope to master it on his own. Instead, it has to manage and cope with us. But this brings us straight back again, as yet another demonstration of how perfectly everything holds together, to the prophetic lineage of Mani. Back in 1920, when he had his dream at Tunis about the extraordinary book which would allow him to master the over- whelming daimonic power of the unconscious, he realized that this mysterious book of his -- his own book, the book he already had somehow written himself -- happened to be a Manichaean text. The book of his own psychology turned out to be a book of Mani. And this is how it has to work, because the only power strong enough to master the primordial prophetic revelation is the prophetic power of the primordial revelation itself. That revelation or "Uroffenbarung" is always the same in its primordial timelessness. But the infinitely subtle wisdom of the unconscious as it manifests through a prophetic lineage creates the paradox that, in the lives of the prophets, this revelation is always changing. Like each new wave as it crashes on the shore of our human existence, it's fresh; reborn. It's the wave of revelation that, in mastering us, sets us free. Or to say this in other words: the unconscious is the problem and 334 PART THREE the unconscious, if we can consciously watch and humbly wait as only a real prophet knows how to, is its own solution. Mani's book is a gift from the unconscious, so generous, so inexpressibly intimate and personal, which will allow Jung to master the impersonal power of the unconscious because the unconscious is the key to itself. Everything else, the scientific posturing along with all the dilettantism, is just a distraction from the real work being accomplished in the depths of silence; an elaborate ruse for throwing everyone, including oneself, off the scent; a totally faithful translation into the ordinary human language which can never get anything right; the most complex dissimulation which at the same time is the simplest possible method, thrown up by the unconscious itself, for keeping one's vestiges well concealed. And here, too, the consistency in Jung's understanding could hardly be more perfect. Over forty years before sitting down to tell his secretary how he had once been forced to translate his mission and message into the language of science, he was still deeply immersed in his work on the Red book. And that's when he recorded the details of a conversation he'd just had with his soul: the kind of details which so easily, so conveniently, could stay lost in some forgotten footnote. Now is the time for you to grow up, she tells him point- blank, and leave science behind. Your destiny lies in the depths and, for that, science is hopelessly superficial and shallow -- is "mere language", nothing but a tool for you to use. Although it might look and sound impressive enough, it's just the latest edition of scholasticism. That's all. You had better get over it; be done with it, once and for all. THE SUNSET WAY 335 But here is where the conversation becomes even more interesting. Jung is getting worried and objects that, if he renounces the whole of science, this will surely be a failing on his part: a blatant offence against the spirit of the time. No, she says back to him, you don't understand. That's not what I am saying at all, because "you shouldn't renounce it completely but should consider science merely your language". From now on, it's nothing more than the language you need to use. And that's all it would ever be for him. But we do love to be fooled, which means we miss out on noting the exquisite agreement between what he stated so clearly in his eighties -- about having had to translate his prophetic message into the language of science -- and what his soul had already told him almost half a century earlier about having to use the language of science as a simple tool. There is a popular Faustian pastime nowadays, which is to discuss all the ways in which Jung's concepts and theories kept evolving over the course of his career. And to be sure, that's a fair enough insight into the shallow surface of his dilettantism; into what can quite accurately be described as his "many unfinished beginnings". But if we look far enough down underneath the shifting tides of scientific language and terminology, absolutely nothing changed at all." Of course it's altogether natural to be wanting as humans, just like Jung himself in a certain way, to leave the prophetic revelation behind for the sake of science: for the science which ideally, as Parmenides or Empedocles already acknowledged, represents the very best any human intelligence is capable of. But actually to do that isn't too easy when even the science, as weve seen from so many different angles, is just a part of the inescapable revelation. 336 PART THREE In fact the essential nature of this primordial revelation which exists, as Jung says, since eternity and can only be glimpsed with the eyes of eternity is its timelessness. It's behind and ahead of us, was there before either we or our culture were born and will still be there long after we are gone. You don't ever leave it behind because, far deeper and greater than any science of ours, it's what endures -- what, once again, has the last word. And so we are brought back, one last time, to that letter Jung once wrote about the mystical fool; about the mystical fool inside him always being stronger than all his science; and about what as a mystical fool he knew he had to do. We can trick and delude ourselves, as his letter explains, about the future evolution of consciousness if that's what we want. But the only way forward for humanity doesn't lie through sweetness and hope. It lies in crucifixion, along "a path of blood and suffering". And who really cares for such an excruciating increase in awareness, consciousness, responsibility? Who can stand or endure it? Who on earth would find the deliberate, and willing, embrace of such suffering worthwhile? That, he says, is the question; and naturally he would never force his own answer on anybody else. "But I confess that I submitted to the divine power of this apparently unsurmountable problem and I consciously and intentionally made my life miserable, because I wanted God to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason more than God's secret intentions. There is a mystical fool in me that proved to be stronger than all my science." There is no way, now, not to come back to this letter because only now is it possible to appreciate what Jung is saying. And 338 PART THREE the place to start is obviously with his deliberate, conscious, intentional acceptance of suffering -- suffering to compensate for the ignorance of humans while, at the same time, suffering for the sake of freeing and healing God. One of the absurdities that Jungians and Jung scholars have silently come to live with is the unspoken need to keep certain aspects of his life and work well apart because, if one was just to let them fit together into a natural whole, the results would be too horrific to bear. And that's exactly the present situation with regard to the theme of psychological compensation. On the one hand we can see very clearly how, an old man in his eighties, he would look back over his entire existence and explain it all as a process of compensation. Everything he had spoken or written, everything he was as the being called Carl Jung, had essentially been nothing but a compensation for our modern times; a counterweight to our rational world; a conscious remembering of what in our reasonableness everyone has chosen to neglect and forget; a coherent unveiling of the things that, in spite of any apparent interest and fascination, nobody really wants to see or hear. On the other hand, he used to explain that this work of compensation is precisely the work of a prophet. As he would say about any great beings, anywhere in the world, who appear as modern prophets: they are going to play "the same compensatory role in relation to their people as the Old Testament prophets did in relation to the 'faithless' children of Israel. Not only do they urge their compatriots to remember their thousand-year- old spiritual culture. They actually embody it and, by doing so, serve as an impressive warning never to forget the claims of the soul even in the midst of all the novelties of western civilization with its materialistic acquisitiveness and its technological and commercial worldliness." And of course in this passage he is THE SUNSET WAY 339 exactly portraying himself -- his own inexhaustible efforts at urging westerners to remember their cultural continuity and spiritual past, at bringing a little sanity into the "lunatic asylum" of western rationalism, even at warning about how the modern disease of acquisitiveness spreads like wildfire out from our material into our spiritual worlds. God forbid, though, if anyone was to connect these two streams and suggest he himself was playing a prophetic role; if anybody was even to hint that this one hand belongs alongside the other hand because they are the two hands of a single being, Jung the prophet. But this little letter ever so conveniently brings everything together, once and for all. What Jung is saying here about being prepared to suffer for God, about wanting to set God free, make God whole, takes us straight back to a crucial passage in the Red book where he is saying exactly the same things at the same time as peppering each statement he makes with quotations from the prophet Isaiah -- including the very same quotations he already had placed, so prominently, at the beginning of the Red book itself. It's the norm nowadays in our post-modern, post-structural world to note those opening quotations from Isaiah for half a second or perhaps even for two and rapidly move on to the rest of the text before leaving that behind as well. But nothing could be more naive than to suppose those quotations were put there by Jung just for the sake of superficial sightseers and intended to be left behind as soon as possible. On the contrary: they are there not only to set the tone for the rest of his "new book" but, at the same time, to set the tone and serve as model for the rest of his life. Everything that needs to be known about the thankless existence of a compensator is stated, so completely, so compactly, 340 PART THREE inside the very first passage Jung quotes from Isaiah right at the start of the Red Sook: "Truly, he himself has borne our sicknesses and he himself has carried our pains." For Jung, just as for Isaiah, the role of prophet is never -- even for a moment -- what it seems. As he constantly keeps warning, it never is going to be what one expects. Humanly, nothing could be more tempting than to think of saviours or prophets as missionaries arriving to lecture and preach. But for him that's the worst conceivable kind of caricature alongside the ridiculous image of a saviour as someone sent to help us escape from life, because a true saviour will only be able to extricate us from our illusions by incarnating the wisdom of life itself. Real prophets or saviours don't set themselves up for anything except to labour and suffer, often silently or alone, for the sake of what the collective consciousness of humanity doesn't have the strength to face. Here is where the task of prophet merges without the slightest effort into the task of saviour, because the prophet's job isn't just to announce some future saviour but to embody the saviour presence by consciously embracing suffering. And here is where we come straight to the heart of western psychology's problem with prophecy. That hunger the prophets have for suffering, for making themselves miserable in the name of what they consider some higher cause, is to our modern minds the most blatant symptom of obsessive masochism; psychotic perversion; mental sickness. But this is where we are also brought straight to the hard core of Jung's stubbornness in so strenuously refusing to subject ancient or modern prophets to psychological analysis. Prophets may suffer terribly: inevitably do. They often have to suffer intentionally and consciously, too. The crucial point is, THE SUNSET WAY 341 though, that the suffering is not their own. And neither, for that matter, is the psychotic perversion. Instead they are simply the ones who have to hold, through suffering, the unbearable tension of balancing inside their consciousness the unconsciousness of humanity as a whole -- who are called to carry the weight of humanity's psychosis in the remote hope that a few other individuals, here or there, might take enough responsibility to share the dark burden of learning how to suffer rightly. When Jung used to mention no longer belonging to himself, this is a large part of what he was referring to: the harshly humbling reality of discovering how to balance, inside oneself, not just one's own individual psychology but everyone else's. The healthy focus in Jungian circles on leading a personally full and balanced life is all very fine and good. At the same time, though, it has to be viewed in another light entirely if for a few people it might need to take the back seat to discovering a quite different kind of balance; if it's no more than a prelude to the vastly harder, and riskier, task of compensating not only one's own imbalances but the imbalances of the world. Then the rules of the game are changed completely. All the bets are off and the best anybody can hope to do is to live the most balanced life possible in an outer sense by acting -- to the maximum capacity of one's human powers -- as a seemingly ordinary human being. But as for the rest: whatever guidance and wisdom are needed will have to come from a far deeper place than anything human, as the ancient prophets explained and as Jung knew just as well. So when he talks in his letter about consciously and intentionally making his life miserable -- "because I wanted God 342 PART THREE to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him" -- Carl Jung is taking his place, very knowingly and deliberately, inside a long tradition of prophecy." And then there is the other detail he goes straight on to add: "I wanted God to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason more than God's secret intentions." But, here too, we can't afford to skip a single word. To hold up our faculty of reason as the one thing that makes God suffer, then to perform the intentional act of quite consciously compensating for the damage done by this reason, is something impossible to understand through reasoning. In fact each normal, plausible, perfectly justifiable and ever so reasonable thought anyone has without paying any attention to the divine mystery behind it: that's exactly what a prophet has to suffer, and compensate, for. Or to state the matter a little more bluntly, reason has become God's enemy. What Jung is saying is that not just every minute but every moment of our compulsive reasoning, every obsessively reasonable act or word or thought, each tolerably scholarly murder, is a direct offence against the sacred. And don't imagine you are going to understand, even notice, what he is really thinking and saying and doing if you are identifying with your daylight rational faculty -- because he is simply having to compensate for you. That's not all, though. There are other places, too, where he states with equal intensity that the human faculty of reason is the greatest violator and chief enemy of nature. And what may seem almost impossible to register any more in the massive ocean of collective reasonableness is that to present our human power of reasoning as the enemy, not just of nature but of God, isn't the teaching of a psychologist; let alone a scientist. There is something totally different involved here. THE SUNSET WAY 343 But we only have to look towards the prophetic tradition William Blake belonged to, and which Jung knew so well, to see that it's the teaching of prophecy. Or rather, it's the primordial roar of suffering that we can hardly tell how to recognize any more. It's the silent howl of prophets working with the full weight and force of nature behind them to neutralize all our politely murderous rationalizations of life, of God, of the unconscious. And -- behind even that -- it's the need deep inside each of us to reach back prophetically to the forgotten logic which has been murdered, which keeps being murdered, by reason itself. Unnoticed because there is such a heavy cost for noticing, each statement Jung is making in this letter is the statement of a prophet; then, again, of a prophet. And so we come to the next comment of his, offered almost as a gentle explanation for the things he has just said: "There is a mystical fool in me that proved to be stronger than all my science." As we already have seen, these are the words of someone instinctively attuned to the spirit of the depths -- which, for all its hiddenness, has far more strength and endurance than the shifting trends of science or the spirit of our time. There is also something else, though, contained in this seemingly straightforward comment. But it's something that will only become apparent if you know the Bible as well as Jung did: in fact as well as he insisted any genuine student of psychology would have to know it. This expression "mystical fool" was his own, shorthand way of using standard prophetic language to describe the prophet who goes unrecognized; unacknowledged; unheard." Everything he says here in his letter is the perfectly consis- tent confession of a modern prophet -- a real prophet in both his life and work, not the absurd caricature of inflated prophets 344 PART THREE which we with our inflated rationalism mistake for the reality behind it. And the substance of what he says couldn't be truer. Jung the prophet would always prove stronger than Jung the scientist; outlast his own science; not only have the last word but the last silence, as well. In the autumn of 1959, just a year or two before he died, as he was getting weaker he decided to go back to the Red book so he could finally bring it to completion. But he couldn't. He tried to finish off the last, unfinished, painting. He wasn't able. As he told his secretary -- who was better at noting down his words than at daring to ask what they meant -- it was death that stopped him. And we can still see why. His last painting was of over a hundred human faces: most of them vividly alive, some of them nothing but ancient skeletons. For him, though, evoking people's faces was far from being some casual or innocent process. On the contrary, it was an almost magical act. As a matter of fact there is one passage in his published biography where he explains how -- throughout his whole life from childhood into old age -- he kept experiencing visions of human faces that would appear to him while he was falling asleep. Often these were the faces of people he knew who, after they had presented themselves to him in this way, would soon die. And then there is the other detail that never made its way into print. This is the detail of what he, himself, originally wanted to say -- which is that those visions of faces actually revealed the future to him by predicting people's coming deaths. But his immediate family was none too happy at the thought of such intimately mystical confessions getting out; and so the mention THE SUNSET WAY 345 of Jung's prophetic powers was deleted, ever so discreetly, from the published text. Being shown the faces of people before they die is one thing. Making the effort to paint such human faces, not just the way they appear alive but already as ancient skulls, is another. And so even when Jung made the final effort to return from what he called the "human side" to his prophetic Red book, even when he tried as an old man to complete at long last what he'd started almost half a century earlier, it would seem his prophetic powers are precisely what stopped him. Theoretically there was no end even then to the possibilities of what he could have gone on writing, or painting, just as there is no limit to what I could keep saying here. But Jung wasn't interested in chattering on about the realms of possibility or possibilities. His quest was for the impossible. And as soon as he had magically managed, just like the prophets he wrote about, to make the impossible possible it was already time to be moving on." From our superficial and altogether legitimate point of view, the problematic failing or inadequacy of the Red book is that it didn't include the human perspective -- the perspective that brings us all together, with our ordinary language and ordinary thoughts, to get almost everything wrong. But underneath this, its problem has nothing to do with incompleteness or lack. On the contrary, its only problem is the overwhelming power as well as the indescribable fullness and perfection of that other reality it was meant to convey: a reality in the face of which every human effort is inadequate, in which the end is already tucked up inside the beginning. And just as the Red book had begun with prophecy, it was prophecy that would abruptly bring it to an end. Everything he had written, Jung explained towards the end of his life, was the result of what he'd inwardly been instructed to say and do. He couldn't escape any of it, evade it, avoid it; couldn't write anything else, either, aside from what he was commanded to write. Each book he started working on soon shaped up to be another unique attempt at introducing the utter ineffability of a completely different reality -- the "unsayable" always lurking in the background of our collective existence -- into the familiar, objective world of science and learning. The process had a beginning, a middle, and then an end in the last major book he ever wrote. When he finished Mysterium coniunctionis he realized he also had finished the underpinning, the solid grounding, of his entire work. This is when he was released, at last, from his post; acquitted of his task. And in the very same instant that he arrived at the ultimate foundation of his whole psychology, he simultaneously bumped up against the remotest boundaries of what can be known: against the transcendent, where everything and everyone goes silent. Of course this is hardly the confession of a scientist or psychologist -- but of a religious, and profoundly mystical, person. At heart Jung wasn't placing the study of religion, of THE SUNSET WAY 347 what sometimes is referred to very professionally nowadays as the "religion -- making process", in the context of science or of psychology. On the contrary: the many commentators who claim this have made a little mistake, because at root he was placing his whole science and psychology in the context of religion. After all, he was the first to admit that even his psychology itself happened to be nothing but "a movement of the spirit", a movement rising out of the depths which, far from him owning or possessing it, had taken complete possession of him and his life. His only role was to submit, and serve." While he was still in his sixties this process of submission rapidly intensified after he got so ill, during 1944, that he almost died. The unspeakable experience of ecstatic mystical union in coming face to face with death started pulling him away again from the "human side" and back, unavoidably, inescapably, towards the world he already had sunk into while being worked on by the Red Sook: that other reality to which the death we all run from is always the key. And if we are going to understand the published works he produced during the final years of his life, we will have to do better than view them as individual islands of creativity. We are going to have to understand the sea. The first major book to emerge, with irresistible force, from his ordeal in 1944 was called Aion. But its title isn't just the ancient Greek word for an age in the history of the world, or even for eternity. It's also an extremely deliberate reference by Jung to the name of the great god who ruled over time in the ancient mysteries -- the very same god he had found himself dramatically merging and uniting with during his crucial experience of deification in December 1913, right at the start of what would become his engagement with the Red book. 348 PART THREE And to avoid any misunderstandings about the importance of Aion as a written work, it will be enough just to quote his own way of connecting it back to the illness that almost killed him in 1944: "Before my illness I had often asked myself if I were permitted to publish or even speak of my secret knowledge. I later set it all down in Aion. I realized it was my duty to communicate these thoughts, yet I doubted whether I was allowed to give expression to them. During my illness I received confirmation and I now knew that everything had meaning and that everything was perfect." The problem, though, with secret knowledge is that it still remains secret even after it's been written down. You can labour over it; analyze each word; intellectualize or wax lyrical about them all. But the secret is never available to the mind because what appear as intellectual ideas and theories are just a cloaking for something else. So I will restrict myself to mentioning a single detail about Aion, which is that one particular figure happens to be absolutely central to the structure and content of the book as a whole. This is Joachim of Fiore, a twelfth-century mystic and heretic who for many reasons -- with the famous teaching of past, present and future world ages that was revealed to him -- can be considered one of the most influential prophets in the course of Christian history. The entire structure of Aion is masterfully designed as Jung's continuation or extension, his updating or renewal of the "vision" given to Joachim almost eight hundred years earlier. And to prevent any misunderstandings about the importance for him of Joachim, or Gioacchino as he sometimes called him, I will just quote something Jung wrote to a trusted friend. He has been explaining that we are very close to the end of what Joachim called the Christian age, or aeon, at the critical THE SUNSET WAY 349 point of transition into the post-Christian aeon due to come next. But the trouble is that almost nobody, including among so-called Christians, has learned yet what it means to be a real Christian; has learned to walk what he calls elsewhere the voluntary "path of blood and suffering". There is hardly anyone who has done the inner work that was needed and is even remotely prepared. "The vast majority of people is still in such an unconscious state, that one should almost protect them from the full shock of the real imitatio Christi. Moreover we are still in the Christian aeon, threatened with a complete annihilation of our world." Then Jung goes straight on to hint at his own role in this situation, at the particular nature of his "job": "As there are not only the many but also the few, somebody is trusted with the task to look ahead and talk of the things to be." Or as he moves into stating the matter even more clearly, "Thus I am approaching the end of the Christian aeon and I am to take up Gioacchino's anticipation and Christ's prediction of the coming of the para- clete. This drama is at the same time exquisitely psychological and historical. We are actually living in the time of the splitting of the world." In other words, Jung was voluntarily stepping into the role of prophet who has been entrusted with extending and renewing Joachim's prophetic vision for the present age. Learned commentators have been duly horrified. Expecting for some reason that his one and only concern would be to act the respectable part of objective psychologist, or detached historian, they stand amazed at the "remarkable leap" he unpredictably makes from cold textual analysis into playing such an engaged and unexpected role. But the sense of such remarkable leaps might simply be due to the fact that Jung was never, even to begin with, in the place we imagine he was leaping from. And others have been a little quicker to admit that here he is presenting 350 PART THREE himself, quite plainly, as a contemporary prophet: "as a modern Joachim di Fiore ushering in a new age of the Spirit". That's only the start, though. When he talks about "taking up" Joachim's work and vision, Jung is using the identical language he also uses elsewhere for describing his relationship to Merlin -- whose prophetic role he had very specifically "taken up again" in his psychology. This language of taking up, through or rather as one's lifetime, an unfinished task that needs renewing and completing in our present age was his way of hinting at the essential mystery of what he called karma or rebirth. And so we see Jung karmically linking himself, as well as his psychology, to two of the most potent prophetic figures in the western world. But even this is only a part of the story -- because it just so happens that the prophetic traditions stemming from Joachim became inextricably intertwined with the prophetic traditions ascribed to Merlin. Prophecies of Merlin merged through the centuries with prophecies of Joachim to the point where, in practice, one could often hardly tell them apart. And it's this dual but single tradition of prophecy that Jung found himself inescapably carrying on."° As for Merlin, with his solitude and craziness and haunting cry: we have already seen how wholeheartedly he identified with this mythical predecessor of his. As for Joachim: there is just one point I will mention because, if it's grasped, it's enough to show how hopelessly with our modern naivety we doom ourselves to misunderstanding Carl Jung. Time after time Jung used to deny he was a prophet and, fools that we are, there is something so gullible inside us we just want to go on taking him each single time at his word. I can keep pirouetting around myself citing all the details of his statements about needing to lie, his references to the practice of concealing THE SUNSET WAY 351 one's vestiges, his own endless dancing between personalities no. 1 and no. 2, and it probably won't change a thing. Ever since we were children we have been trained to believe obediently almost everything we are told and -- in spite of our headstrong opinions which aren't even our own -- that's precisely what we do. But there is one point I didn't yet have a chance to mention, which is that in the history of our western culture nothing is more standard or routine than for prophets to deny they are prophets. One of the most notorious cases of a prophet denying he is a prophet was none other than Joachim of Fiore. It's not only a question of Joachim, though, or of the different prophetic figures in and around his time who also wisely pretended not to be prophets -- because prophetic visions are all very well and good provided they come from a distant past but are apt to cause no end of problems when they come from someone you happen to know. Quite to the contrary: the denials have been going on for thousands of years in a tradition that reaches back all the way to the world of the Old Testament itself. And in fact the Hebrew prophet Amos perfectly managed to create the template for whoever came later with his most straightforward of declarations that "I am not a prophet". In other words, just as to resist and challenge and struggle with and even rebel against becoming a prophet isn't the proof of not being a true prophet but only an indication of the opposite, to deny outright that one is a prophet is the mark of an authentic prophet too. It's simply part and parcel of the prophetic job. And by "taking up" the work of Joachim, Jung was finding himself at home with a long line of individuals who were like him in many more ways than one. When he insisted so adamantly that there is no understanding him or his psychology without knowing and understanding the 352 PART THREE Bible, he was being far more serious than one might think. But we are so contaminated with the inflation of modernity, we don't even realize how great a problem our ignorance has become. And this ignorance of prophetic tradition, in particular, isn't limited to Jungians by any means -- because we live in a world where even most Jews nowadays hardly have the slightest clue about their prophets any more. With Jung, things were rather different. His father was a tragic but very talented man who not only studied every corner of the Hebrew Bible, including the ancient prophets. He even became an expert on biblical commentaries written, centuries before his time, at Jerusalem in Arabic. And Jung's poor opinion of him as a human being would only strengthen the extraordinary influence that his father's interests kept exerting on him, at a subterranean level, for the rest of his life. But it wasn't just a matter of the subjects his father had studied. There is something else about these subjects that mattered far more -- the infinite subtleties and refinements of the culture behind them, an intuitive sense for intricacies which comes from studying them but is as distant from anything offered by a modern education as an oriental carpet from a doormat. Perhaps you still want to think such quaintly biblical sophistications are details we can easily afford to ignore when approaching Jung. The truth is, though, that these subtleties don't just exist to add to the finer resonances of his message or offer a touch of richer colour here and there. They change absolutely everything: convert the most categorical no into a resounding yes, transform every yes of ours into a no. But, today, the mention of such subtleties might give us a moment's shock; even a split second of disorientation. Then, the chances are we'll just spring straight back into taking everything at face value -- into trusting what shouldn't THE SUNSET WAY 353 be trusted while making sure to ignore what should -- with the result that our cats or dogs would probably understand Jung far better than we do."' And so we come to that other book he wrote which, as things turned out, would be his ultimate gesture of reconciliation with his father. From the point of view of his superficial everyday personality, Answer to Job was a damnable piece of work: the words of an "unspeakable fool" who was stupid enough to disrupt the wishes of the bourgeois coward inside him and disturb his own longing to go on sleeping peacefully like everyone else. From the point of view of his deeper personality, at home in eternity, it was the greatest gift; the fisherman who magically catches a whale, or the whale who catches the fisher; a magnificent piece of music; something so perfect that, after the initial revisions he made to remove the worst and craziest of his apparent blasphemies, it was the one piece of work he would never dream of modifying or changing. As for how exactly it related to Aion, Jung's answer was simple. In theme and topic the two books were intimately linked. At the same time, though, Aion had been far too polite -- much too civilized and "man-made". Now was the time to go wild. And that's literally what happened. For forty years, since the time of his work on the Red book, the material that would erupt into Answer to Job had been bottled up inside him. And the only way it could come out, as so often with Jung, was through sickness. He became ill, the fever itself is what forced him to write, and only when he had finished did the sickness leave him. All sorts of wonderful fantasies have been spun, half-true, about Jungian psychology as an eminent method for avoiding extremes; for finding internal balance and equilibrium, true 354 PART THREE groundedness, the seamlessly accomplished integration of each function and faculty inside a human being. Then there are the well-manicured notions about Jung himself as the perfect model of a serene, fully balanced, equilibriated wise old man. But sometimes the humble reality tended to be a little different. And when the daimon of Jung's creativity erupted, all hell broke loose. Writing Aion, which had caused him more and more sleep- lessness the deeper he went, was difficult enough. But Answer to Job swept through him, along with his home and household, like a storm. Although his fragile health obviously wasn't up to it, as always he had no choice. For the months that he was writing, then revising, the text there were times when he not only hardly slept but hardly shaved; hardly washed. People in his immediate circle were terrified of what might happen to him as well as what he might do to them. He shut himself away for hours and worked until he was exhausted. Then he became moody and often furious, lashed out for no reason, was crude and rude. The greatest fear of all was what would happen if journalists turned up unexpectedly to interview him -- and the secret hope was that they just might end up interviewing the gardener instead, because at least he was much "closer to reality. Jung lived now in another world." As for what the book itself was about, what he was being driven so hard to say: it was about the darkness of God and the suffering the divine darkness causes in our human world. But just as important as its main topic and theme is the fact that, in spite of any appearances hinting otherwise, Jung wasn't going to be talking theoretically or historically or theologically about this darkness -- about the darkness of Job's God, the God of the Old Testament. On the contrary, he made himself perfectly clear that through his little book he wouldn't be debating or arguing about God. THE SUNSET WAY 355 He would be arguing with God, directly, instead. What he was being forced so overwhelmingly to do, and what his father would come back from the dead to thank him for, was to stand up and confront God; challenge God face to face; speak to God, argue with God, as only a human can. And that meant being as incapable of distancing himself from God with the help of the usual nice theories, polite abstractions, as Job with his excruciating suffering had been unable to remove himself. It meant consciously and intentionally suffering just as Job had chosen to suffer -- and not only as Job had nobly suffered but as Christ, the archetypal suffering servant, would suffer too. It involved deliberately taking God's darkness on himself by enter- ing so deep inside it that, from there, he could compensate for humans' ridiculous obsession with the deceptive light of reason. It also involved, needless to say, having to accept all the misunderstandings and abuse that would be hurled his way. But those were hardly going to make any difference because, as he answered when asked what the writing of Answer to Job really entailed: thanks to it "I live in my deepest hell, and from there I cannot fall any further'. And if this sounds very familiar, it should -- because we are back in the place we never even left, which is the land of prophecy. I do understand that any memory of such a long-forgotten place, of our own indigenous land and earth and nature, is far too painful now to recognize. That's why for the most part all we allow ourselves to appreciate in Jung is the person, the inventive man, the self-willed character: never, God forbid, the force he himself pointed to time and time again as the reality responsible for overpowering and compelling him to do the things he did. A large part inside each of us refuses, to the bitter end, honestly to acknowledge that he was serving as the mouthpiece and spokesperson for something far beyond him -- to recognize his 356 PART THREE indispensable role in what he called the "tragic self-contradiction" of being forced from the depths of the unconscious to challenge God's unconsciousness, of having to help the power of the unconscious take a stand against the power of the unconscious, of making it possible for God to argue with God. That's all, in its purest form, a little too disconcerting to admit. And so it could only be a matter of time before Jung had to face the full impact of the abuse, not to mention misunderstandings; before everything would be reduced, very rationally and systematically, to the petty and personal and biographical; before he would even be accused of anti-Semitism for his tasteless attacks on the Jewish God, or at the very least of bad timing because he'd dared to produce Answer to Job so soon after the horrors of the Holocaust. But what's almost never noticed is how strange it is, for a supposedly anti-Semitic text, that Answer to Job contains such respectful references to Jewish sacred literature and traditions. And even when these references are occasionally pointed out, what's even stranger is the failure to realize that it's not just a question of the Jewish material contained inside the book. What's far more important is the book's essential form, because -- according to Jewish sacred traditions -- there is only one kind of person who has the ability, the authority, the audacity to challenge or argue with God face to face. And that, naturally, is a prophet. One rare bird who, even before the book's official release, realized the truth of what Jung was doing through Answer to Job just so happened to be his closest Jewish friend: Erich Neumann. The very first message he sent to Jung after reading an early copy of the text was to say how intensely this book, the finest and deepest Jung had ever written, was gripping him. As a matter of fact, he added, it's so much more than a book that it can hardly be called a book at all -- because "in a very THE SUNSET WAY 357 real sense it's an argument with God, similar to what Abraham found himself involved in when he argued with God". And just as Abraham was the very first person in the Bible to be described as a prophet, he was also the earliest of the biblical prophets to challenge or argue with God. With the passing of time an entire lineage of argumentative prophets would follow on from him: a lineage culminating in the most notorious dis- puter with his own maker, and crier against the violence of the divine, who was the prophet known as Habakkuk." Of course, though, there should be no need to state the obvious which is that most of us are sensible enough for our tolerance to have its limits. Nowadays, to hear Jung mentioned in the same breath as Isaiah or Abraham or even Amos is hard enough. But to hear his name coupled with an obscure prophet like Habakkuk -- that's pushing things much too far. And I am not going to argue with that. Instead, I'll just leave the matter to others who are far more capable of arguing than me. One very odd characteristic that Jung became famous for was seeing everything, even the most ordinary of everyday objects, as alive; as a conscious, individual, often nameable being, It's a tendency that his followers weren't quite sure whether to laugh at, imitate, or generalize into impressive theories and dogmas -- without ever realizing or admitting to themselves that this strange quality of seeing everything as timelessly and interconnectedly alive is, itself, a unique feature of a prophet. But in Jung's particular case there is yet another factor to consider, which is that this gift of seeing all objects and even thoughts as conscious living beings had been given to him directly by his own beloved teacher Philemon: the prophétén pateér, "father of prophets'. And of all the objects that surrounded Jung through his later life, there is one specific set which in a sense mattered to him more than anything else. 358 PART THREE His smoking didnt just give him pleasure; make his physical existence tolerable; his work and efforts bearable. It also symbolized what held him to the earth -- his identity and most basic existence as an utterly simple, very lonely human being. As for the pipes he used: they came and went. But the one object that didn't go or come was his bronze tobacco pot which he used for filling each different pipe. It had been handed down to him, obviously through his father, from his grandfather. And you will already have guessed its name. It was Habakkuk.!°° CATAFALQUE I prefer to say little about Henry Corbin not because there is little to say, but because what does have to be said is best surrounded by silence. From my teens through to my early thirties I was held fast in an awareness that the oldest western philosophers -- the so- called Presocratics -- weren't just the rationalists they are usually claimed to be. They also included mystics and prophets. This might sound like a matter of purely historical or antiquarian interest, except that it was nothing of the kind. The awareness weighed on me with an inhuman, inescapable, almost crushing burden. And at the same time it penetrated every aspect of my very human daily life with the sense of something not only immensely ancient but, in particular through the presence of Empedocles, infinitely alive. Nowhere in the whole of western literature was there any serious tradition that made the slightest effort to come to grips with this. It was a secret which had been so effectively sealed off from our collective western nightmare that nowhere in the world around me was there the slightest reflection of any such reality -- until one day the proverbial book flew off a shelf as I was walking across the floor of a London bookstore and landed, already open, right in front of me. 364 PART FOUR When I stopped to see what peculiar message was lying at my feet, I noticed that the book was by someone called Henry Corbin. As for the passage staring up at me: it was a quotation from a seventeenth-century Persian Sufi stating that the oldest western philosophers, back before the time of Aristotle, included the greatest of mystics. It added that they'd given their whole lives to the "effort of spiritual struggle" and, very far from being devoted to reasoning or rationality, "one might even say that they are frankly hostile to them". Just like that, with Henry Corbin's abrupt eruption into my life, the aloneness I had been suffering from was over. Through slowly searching the rest of his work I soon discovered that, according to Persian Sufis, the Presocratic philosophers were crucial early links in what Corbin himself came to call "prophetic philosophy". And so I was brought face to face with the ridiculous paradox that Persian Sufism had rescued and preserved the secret of the West which the West itself had forgotten -- the secret understanding that western philosophy, logic, science, even the apparent arts of reason, all had their origin in the experience of another world.' Then, as such things happen, I was introduced to Henry Corbin's widow. The deepest and most mysterious of friendships began, with her revealing details about her husband which he had always hesitated to put in print. But now there was a constant intensity and urgency in what she told me because things had already got so out of hand, with all the misunderstandings and misinterpretations of what he'd written, that she felt the crushing burden of needing to set matters straight. One of the many key points she kept coming back to during the hours we spent together was the question of her husband's real identity and purpose -- not as a scholar with some minor mystical leanings but as a mystic, inwardly directed to play the role of academic. And she loved talking about the time she and he spent CATAFALQUE 365 together in Iran; describing how the great spiritual teachers or sheikhs often offered to initiate him as a Sufi on condition that he converted to Islam; and how he always politely refused. "Uhank you for your invitation but there is no need, because I already have my inner sheikh inside me." Even so, although there seemed almost no end to the personal and intimate details she confided to me, it's not as if the whole of what she told me had simply been kept unsaid. Instead, some of it already had been publicly mentioned by him in such an elusive and allusive way that nothing would be easier than not even to notice. Once for instance, in the context of an unusual interview shortly before he died, he explained just what his view was on the subject of conversion. In it Corbin recalls his experience at an international conference about twenty years earlier, when "one colleague from a distant country" heard him talking about Persian spiritual tradition the way he normally used to do and "whispered to his neighbour: 'How can anyone talk like that about a religion that isn't your own?' "But what does it mean", Corbin stops his story to ask, "to make a religion or a philosophy 'one's own'? Unfortunately, there are people who are only capable of thinking in terms of 'conversion' because that's what allows them to attach a collective label to who you are. No way! Anyone who talks about 'conversion' hasn't understood anything about the 'esoteric'." Then he goes on to describe what real esotericism, or inwardness, actually implies for a person -- by citing the prophet Isaiah. Such an individual "is forced to keep his secret. Secretum meum mihi, 'My secret is for me. The secret of the castle of the soul." And he makes sure to add that "the community, the ummah, of esotericists from all places and all times is that 'inner church' which demands no outer act or gesture of belonging as a requirement for being allowed to take part. But this inner 366 PART FOUR connecting link is the true link because no one can remove it or take it away, it can't be damaged or destroyed, and because only thanks to it is there any truth in the saying that 'the mouth speaks from the fullness of the heart'."" Here, of course, we are brought straight back to the essence of what Henry Corbin meant by that "absolute spiritual freedom" he encountered at Eranos in the presence of Carl Jung. Helped along by his biblical quotations, he arrives right at the heart of Jung's whole psychology with its overriding emphasis on the devastating effects of every external collectivity. At the same time, what he says here about the reality of an "inner church" corresponds exactly to what had already been said by someone over half a century earlier. That was when Jung himself appealed to the example of Christ by quoting from the Bible, just like Corbin, and for the sake of those around him explained how "if we belong to the secret church, then we belong, and we need not worry about it, but can go our own way. If we do not belong, no amount of teaching or organization can bring us there."° There is always another side to everything, and on the other side of outer spiritual freedom lies something else. That other side is freedom's darker half: the reality of the inner teacher or sheikh. Here, too, Corbin explained the essential quite plainly -- although there is no saying for certain if what he allowed to be published was far too brief or, on the contrary, not nearly brief enough. Again just a few months before dying he had taken the greatest care to record how in October 1939 he left Paris, with his wife, for Istanbul. It was meant to be a three-month mission to gather manuscripts containing texts by a Persian Sufi called Suhrawardi. But that was just life's excuse or pretence. Thanks, outwardly, to the war those three months turned into six years; and during this time of freedom from any outer distractions "I learned the inestimable virtues of silence, of what initiates call 'the discipline of the arcane' (ketmdn in Persian). One of the virtues of this silence is that 1 found myself placed, I alone together with him alone, in the company of my invisible sheikh. Shihab al-Din Yahya Suhrawardi, who died a martyr in 1191 at the age of thirty-six which happened to be my own age at the time." 368 PART FOUR Day and night, Corbin describes, he worked on translating Suhrawardi's writings -- and "when those years of retreat finally came to an end I had become an Ishragi".' Probably there is no point at all in spelling out the obvious. But this deceptively simple passage, with its passing reference to the quintessential mystical experience of encountering one's invisible teacher, contains the most secret kernel of his life as well as his work. For him Suhrawardi would always be his single, innermost orientation: his central point of focus. And Suhrawardi's own inner focus and orientation would always be on the ishrag -- on the point of dawn in the East. This Ishragi tradition he gave rise to wasn't, as people in the West are lazily inclined to suppose, a tradition of pure enlightenment or illumination. It was, much more specifically, the tradition of those who appear with the dawn; who belong to the moment of dawning; who tirelessly and timelessly work at fetching the gifts of the sacred into the light of day. And as for Corbin himself: on his frank admission he wasn't just some scholar studying or reporting on the intricacies of this antique tradition. He was now an initiated Ishraqi in his own right.° There is one important detail, though, which is missing from this published account of his -- but which his wife made sure to discuss with me a number of times. This is the fact that he realized Suhrawardi was invisibly, silently, overwhelmingly, even geographically, holding him fast. He had the very distinct, quite physical awareness that he wasn't holding the strings of his life because his teacher was; using outer circumstances to corner him; trap him and trick him; keep him, for whatever time was needed, all to himself. And from then on, his life was no longer his own. CATAFALQUE 369 But even this had been noted and mentioned by Corbin in his published writings, for anyone willing to look. Ten years before he died, he briefly described to an academic audience in France how his fateful introduction to Suhrawardi's writings is the single event that sealed his destiny. "I was drawn (entrainé) into becoming publisher of the works of Suhrawardi and Suhrawardi drew me (méentraina) far, far away from the peaceful tasks entrusted to me at the National Library." It would be so easy to ignore the repetition here of the word entrainer, "drawn ... drew", except that there is nothing accidental about it at all. On the contrary, this kind of repetition is literally a signature. For ages it's been the standard sign of initiation into the sacred mysteries, just like Jung's announcement at the start of the Red book about how he had been forced, forced, taken, taken by the spirit of the depths -- or Parmenides' account right at the start of his poem evoking how he had been carried, carried, carried, carried into the realities of another world. This is how Corbin and Jung and Parmenides were pulled into meeting with their superiors, as Empedocles called them. And the point of this pulling, in Corbin's case, could hardly be clearer. It was to show that our ideas of truth, or reality, are just an upside-down illusion. We, among the so-called living, are not in charge of our lives as we think. The real fingers around our necks or on our pulses are not our own. As a matter of fact we are hardly alive at all, here, because the real truth is that we are held fast in the grip of the dead.° This is why Suhrawardi's tradition is, itself, so dangerously alive. It's able to reach out through and across the centuries, secretly, silently, whenever someone is ready -- whoever, wherever, you are. And that aliveness explains the name he gave his Ishragi tradition: the "eternal leaven". 370 PART FOUR Just like leaven or yeast it contains its own living germ, its transformative enzyme, inside. But that also makes it a perpetual source of ferment; of disorder and disturbance, agitation, unpredictable change. And this in turn is exactly why Suhrawardi was killed at the age of thirty-six, put to death by the rigid powers of dogmatism for opening the door to too much life. Instead of admitting as expected to the Islamic clergy that prophecy was dead, that it had come to an end with Muhammad, when interrogated he gently indicated it was still alive inside him. But even more threateningly, and offensively, he allowed prophecy to spread unchecked not just forward into the present or future. He also followed it far into the past -- openly announcing that his own tradition of the dawn reached back way beyond Muhammad to the earliest Greeks and Persians. That was one of the main reasons for his execution: that he made the mistake of treading in the footsteps of the Ancients. In fact aside from describing this troublesome leaven or restless ferment as eternal, he had another name for it too. At times he also called it "the leaven of the Pythagoreans". And he traced this livingness back not just to the sacred figure of Hermes but very specifically, very explicitly, to somebody else in particular -- the philosopher and prophet Empedocles.' Just like some cosmic cycle, the prophetic impulse to find life in death is always going to be met by the deceptive need to turn life into death. Even through his final role as a martyr, not to mention many of the details in his teachings, Suhrawardi was following the traces of one very particular prophetic tradition: the lineage stemming from the great Gnostic known as Seal of the Prophets, Mani. And as is bound to be the case with such sacred traditions, that heretically challenge every cherished collective belief, the most potent threat to the threats it poses is never going to come only from outside. On the contrary, it's going to come from the innermost circle -- in exactly the same way that it also comes from inside us. As a twentieth-century Ishragi Corbin lived, for the most part unnoticed, the life of a knight: a spiritual knight entrusted with upholding the laws of chivalry. And in his case this meant, especially, always looking for the absolute best inside the people around him. That was his protection but also his vulnerability, even naivety. This is why during the times he spent in Iran forming collaborations, forging friendships, creating alliances, he learned to expect the highest and finest among his closest colleagues; assumed they too, like him, understood the mystery of that 372 PART FOUR invisible bond which comes from belonging to the inner church beyond any empty formalities of external religion or conversion. It was this inner bond, this direct link between heart and heart, that he believed would let "my Iranian friends feel perfectly at ease" with him as they all laboured together in "a friendship free from any mental reservation or ulterior motive".* But, needless to say, things didn't quite work out that way. It was the same story whether Henry Corbin was present or absent; still alive or already dead. His most intimate and influential Iranian colleagues just couldn't resist, whenever the opportunity presented itself, criticizing him sharply for failing to take a physical teacher by converting to Islam. The irony is that they were perfectly familiar with the altogether legitimate tradition, inside Islam, of the so-called Uwaisis: Sufis who happen to have no outer teacher because they have been initiated, all alone with their teacher alone, by an invisible sheikh. They also knew very well how these rare Uwaisis are supposed to be guided and sustained by the spirit of Khidr -- a mysterious figure often identified with the prophet Elijah. At times they were even tempted to cite the Uwaisis as a direct and obvious parallel to the case of Corbin, only to dismiss such a parallel straight away. After all, Corbin's appeal to the reality of an inner teacher was plainly little more than the fantasy of a dreamer; the product of too active an imagination. And what was equally significant was their eagerness to dis- pose of the inescapable awareness that gripped Corbin of being held fast by an invisible shetkh -- the physical and gut-wrenching experience Corbin's wife Stella and I were often drawn to discuss of being pulled in one direction as opposed to another, dragged by the finest intelligence away from every distraction, forced without the slightest choice into the depths of oneself. But, upstanding men of religion that they were, to them this was basically all just words. For them nothing could be simpler CATAFALQUE 373 than to turn the ruthless reality of faceless force into some pretty image of Suhrawardi taking Henry Corbin, "almost literally', by the hand and kindly guiding him from place to place. At the same time, for them such images were only fancy metaphors meant to gloss over the fact that everything Corbin had done was purely the result of his own conscious choices and wishes and decisions. And in saying all this they were just as much rationalists as every one of those upstanding Jungians who benignly imply that Jung himself was only talking the language of metaphor when he reported being forced and dragged away from everything familiar by the invisible spirit of the depths -- because his dedication to plumbing the abyss of the unconscious was, of course, the result of his own very conscious decision and wish and choice.' That's only the first half of this little tale, though. And even more significant than the treatment of Corbin by his so-called colleagues is the way they treated Suhrawardi. In the eyes of Corbin, one of the most striking things about Suhrawardi's vision of sacred history is that it valued ancient Greek sages just as highly as Islamic mystics. It was a vision that saw both West and East as ultimately, not to mention primordially, one. The timeless energy inside the leaven moves through time wherever it wishes and chooses -- not where we choose or decide. But for Corbin's closest Iranian friend and collaborator, who even worked with him in editing the actual texts of Suhrawardi, that was totally unacceptable. So he did what anyone in his shoes would be bound to do; cut off, ever so subtly, the flow of life through Suhrawardi's tradition of dawning; did what he could to kill off the living leaven inside it. And instead of mentioning the idea of an "eternal leaven" he silently, absurdly, replaced it with something else: the notion of an "eternal dough". 374 PART FOUR Suddenly the mystery so alive in this ferment had been downgraded to some passive substance waiting, inert, to be activated by the right people at the right time -- especially by orthodox forces inside the tradition of Islam. Everything was back again under human supervision and conscious control, the borders of orthodoxy not only protected but tightly closed." And, needless to say, it's the same story as Carl Jung's lava all over again. When Jung made the mistake of talking about the living stream of volcanic lava spontaneously taking care of everything, bringing everything into its right place, that wouldn't do at all. We can very comfortably state with perfect assurance what he had been meaning and wanting to say, which is that he himself took good care of everything; put it all in its appropriate place. In other words: the only sensible, dependable solution is to mistranslate. Now everything has been fixed with Suhrawardi, too. To any casual eye, Corbin's work is being faithfully continued -- but, in reality, discreetly undermined. It's so simple, so subtle. Everything seems and sounds the same, but nothing is. Just the slightest twist is needed, the tiniest hint of dogmatism or excess rigidity, and the entire dynamic has changed; just one speck of impurity and the original, prophetic vision is lost. And this isn't only a matter of how some person, here or there, translates a text. It's a question of how each of us lives, at every moment of any day or night. Whenever we let go of ourselves because we don't trust enough, or there is something deep inside we are desperate to forget, then we have missed our chance. But if we hold on too tight -- convince ourselves we've mastered what our little minds can never grasp -- the betrayal is complete and the damage has already been done. The tenderness in Carl Jung's confession of his "extraordinary joy' at being completely understood by Henry Corbin, while the rest of his life was a more or less total "intellectual vacuum', is like the intimacy of horses recognizing each other by their scent. And, needless to say, an equal tenderness is called for if we are going to understand the nature of this understanding. But, instead, it's been sucked up and away into the vacuum of total incomprehension. Nowadays the authoritative account of Corbin's relationship to Jung has it that, after meeting him, he got terribly excited; had a wonderful intellectual honeymoon with Jung's ideas; was quick to assert his freedom and sooner or later had left any Jungian influence behind. And this had to happen, we are told, because Jung and Corbin were different. Jung carved in stone and Corbin didn't, so it would be absurd to imagine there could be any enduring empathies or profound similarities between them. These encounters of independent-minded thinkers are always just a flash in the pan." In fact, though, that's not how things happened at all -- for a very good reason. This archetypally American story of excitement and instant thrills only touches on the outermost surface, the external, the 376 PART FOUR exoteric: on what Jung called the world of personality no. 1. And such a superficial approach is bound to end up utterly clueless in the face of what Henry Corbin, for his part, referred to as the true inwardness of esotericism or the esoteric. The first time that Corbin and Jung ever met was during the late summer of 1949. After the Eranos conference in southern Switzerland Jung invited Corbin back to his home on the outskirts of Zurich for a discussion that, "so warm and open, so full of promise for the future", lasted for hours. And they had plenty to talk about -- not, as one might naively think, by butting heads over this particular issue or that but by exploring together the kinds of awareness which are needed for gaining access to the inner truth behind every external issue. For instance it's no coincidence that they both, quite independently of each other, had been absorbed in uncovering and evoking the cognitio matutina or "dawn consciousness" buried inside us all: the selfless awareness which, still inspired by the wisdoms of the night, hasn't yet been contaminated by the irresistible urge at the sunset of a civilization to exploit any spiritual truth until it becomes one more diabolical tool in our all-too-human hands." Then, three years later, came the great encounter for which Corbin would say all their previous meetings had been just a preparation -- their encounter over Jung's Answer to Job. Henry Corbin's enormous review of the book is what prompted Jung to write that it was Corbin who had given him not only "the rarest of experiences, but the unique experience, of being completely understood". And it might seem tempting to dismiss this statement as no more than the enthusiastic acceptance of the enthusiastic review of one, particular book. But that would be to miss the point entirely. CATAFALQUE 377 For Jung Answer to Job was the one, and only, book he ever published that was brought directly into existence from the depths of the sacred inside him. It, not he, had done the writing as it swept like a hurricane right through him. At the same time he described hearing it as music: the same music Corbin, too, would hear when he sat down to read it. Everyone else was panicking about the book's acceptability; desperately doubting or attacking it; nobly trying to rationalize it; justify it. But Corbin and Jung were the two people who silently listened.' The acuteness of the situation was perfectly clear to Jung. Writing this one book brought him face to face with the most essential aspect of his whole work, of his real task. And the entire medical profession -- psychiatrists, healers, clinicians -- didn't have the slightest idea what that work or that book was about. This doesn't mean he just gave other professionals the cold shoulder, though, or dismissed them for their total lack of understanding. On the contrary, with striking humility and the rarest honesty he realized that their attitude of defensive mockery and aggressive stupidity was also his; that the typically dumb medical point of view which had infected them had infected him, as well; that their resistance to the numinous reality of the sacred was, at the same time, the stubborn resistance and idiocy of his own "dull conscious mind" which will always claim it knows what it never can. Now, of course, everything works exactly in reverse. We all have Jung's wisdom implanted like some clever little computer in our dull conscious minds and our understanding is crystal clear even when we don't understand a thing." But that's not the whole story, either, because he didn't just find himself confronted with the incomprehension of indepen- 378 PART FOUR dent scientific experts or of the expert scientist inside him. He also found himself face to face with the incomprehension of his well-intentioned followers. And from their initial reactions to the book, even before it was officially published, he realized that the Jungians too are no different from anyone else. It was the same situation, all over again, as with Christ's disciples falling asleep in the garden at Gethsemane. Far from Jungians being able to fill the abysmal void in which he was so accustomed to living, that intellectual vacuum also consisted of them." This was the vacuum, the terrible aloneness, that Henry Corbin stepped into. And as for what it was that made his response to Answer to Job so special, the answer could hardly be plainer. His long review of the book, which Jung considered not only so rare but so completely unique in its understanding, presented Answer to Job from start to end as a work of prophecy -- and Jung, himself, as a prophet in the truest sense of the word." Of course Jung's closest Jewish colleagues would also try to say as much, in their own ways. Erich Neumann, for his part, would compare the Jung of Answer to Job with Abraham in his typically focused but suggestive style. James Kirsch, shortly before he died, would devote a passionate lecture to painting the Jung who wrote Answer to Job as the greatest prophet of our age. And it's to Kirsch, too, that we owe one of those vivid details which lend an altogether new complexion to our understanding of the time when Jung was working on his Red book: "He, himself, told me that during the years in which he received the revelations, i.e., from 1912 to 1916, his face became quite luminous, radiant, like that of Moses, and that people were afraid to look at him." CATAFALQUE 379 But Kirsch, as Jung's friend, was afflicted with an insight that psychologically he couldn't handle. And what made Henry Corbin's extended discussion of Jung as creator of Answer to Job so exceptional is that -- because of his own immersion in a living prophetic lineage stretching all the way from Persian Sufis back even beyond the ancient Greeks -- he lived what he wrote. That's why he could not just describe, but also recognize, the most intimate tastes and smells of prophecy so well.'' The discussions over Answer to Job continued between Jung and Corbin during visits, by both Corbins, to Jung's home in the Zurich suburb of Kiisnacht; also at Bollingen. But there is one particular meeting they had, in September 1955, which is worth mentioning. Years later, after Jung was already dead, Corbin would look back at it with special fondness as well as regret because -- "alas!" -- it was the last in-depth encounter they ever managed to have. And it just so happens that the handwritten notes he made of that discussion, straight after the meeting had taken place, still survive. The notes are full of "yes, but", of agreements followed by subtler points of disagreement. And anyone who skimmed through them without paying attention could even imagine Corbin wanting to complain because Jung wouldn't simply accept, or submit to, his personal point of view. Again, though, that would be to misunderstand the situation completely. Corbin lists, from memory, the subjects they discussed: music, God and soul and devil, therapy and revelation, vision and visionary consciousness, psychological integration and the sacred, going beyond the profane and leaving the rational intellect behind, Ibn al -- 'Arabi and the mystical identity with God, true individuation as becoming God or God's secret. CATAFALQUE 381 But at the same time he also lists the subtleties of movement from subject onto subject, with the conversation gracefully shifting through the most delicate and esoteric aspects of Sufi teaching. In fact just to follow that movement, step by step, is to realize what this conversation really was -- not some clumsy rough-and-tumble of different ideas, but a dance." And anyone at all familiar with the practices of Sufism will recognize this dance for what it is. In Persian as well as Turkish its name is sohbet -- the tradi- tional name for the inexplicable closeness and pleasure and joy felt by the pure-hearted in each other's company. This is the reason why "Sufis say there are three ways of being with the mystery: prayer, then a step up from that, meditation, and a step up from that," sohbet or the supreme joy of mystical dialogue. To be drawn into the reality of sohbet is suddenly to have the direct experience that, instead of just talking to some other human, you are speaking with "a person like the dawn". And the funny thing is that, right at the climax of noting down this conversation with Jung, Corbin even states explicitly what's going on. "Supréme joie du dialogue", he carefully records: the supreme joy of dialogue. But he's not just noting down some theoretical idea they discussed, one more passing subject of conversation. He is also recording what actually took place in that space between him and Jung -- as an immediate continuation and confirmation of the "joie extraordinaire" or "extraordinary joy" Carl Jung had already experienced on being so uniquely, so completely, understood by Henry Corbin. In other words, what they were talking about and what they were doing were one and the same thing. Their discussion was, itself, the experiences they were discussing." And to have left their interaction there, in the borderless formlessness of infinite mystical union, would psychologically have been a total disaster. 382 PART FOUR But Corbin was no fool -- which is why, at the end of his notes, he marks the stage of bringing everything back again into a world of separation. There is Jung, and there is Corbin, and there is a healthy reminder of the differences between them because Jung will always be the psychologist and healer; Corbin will never stop being the mystic and metaphysician. Or as Corbin himself explains, Jung's main focus will always be on the case of some sick patient needing help while mine will always be on the ideal case of a mystic. And then he adds the three words, in ancient Greek, which bring everything to a close: monos pros monon, "alone to alone'. This, originally magical and mystical, expression was a key theme for Corbin because it conveys so well the nature of our invisible bond with the divine reality inside us. For him it captures the infinitely simple, but endlessly mysterious, essence of true individuation -- of the process which allows would-be humans to grow up to become real individuated humans, genuinely "solitary, authentically alone, freed from every collective norm" because they just let themselves be held in a constant alignment with the eternal aloneness of their higher self. Here is that same inner secret, again, for which Corbin liked quoting the prophet Isaiah's Secretum meum mihi; "My secret is for me". And it's a secret which always will be monos pros monon, alone to alone, "in the sense that no one else is present to such intimacy". But this, too, isn't all. Behind that mystical sense of connection to one's own divine reality there is another, even more ancient meaning of those words. Monos pros monon also can refer to the most intimate conversation and dialogue between two human beings. And as a matter of fact this particular meaning features right at the start of that review Corbin wrote for Answer to Job. CATAFALQUE 383 Or to be more precise: this is how he introduces not just his review, or the book, but Jung himself. Jung, he launches straight into explaining, is one of those very few rarest of people who have become genuinely and authentically alone inside themselves with the divine mystery; have managed to do what's almost unheard of by separating from every ready-made opinion or collective idea. And "it's because we find ourselves, here, in the presence of this man a/one that I would like to invite all those who are alone to meditate on this book and to listen to this message if they truly are alone." Of course the terrifying consequence of what he is saying is that hardly anyone is alone because most people are surrounded all the time by their collective projections, cluttered by ghostly illusions, crowded out by constant expectations and aspirations wherever they go. Even so, his conclusion is remorseless. Whoever hasn't discovered this total inner aloneness is doomed to fail from the very outset in any attempt at understanding Jung, or Jung's work -- because only the alone can understand the alone, monos pros monon. And just how accurate he was in his estimate of Jung, not to mention Jung's work, is perfectly evident from what we know about the period when Jung himself was being worked on by his Red book. Now we can see in its naked clarity how he conceived of the individuation process: as the way to become God, for sure, but as a way that's closed off completely from everyone not able to tolerate the cosmic aloneness of their own almost unbearable singleness and uniqueness. To be individuated, as Jung understood, is to become a single distant star -- is to have to learn how to live far out in the coldest and most solitary spaces, beyond even the experience of death. And to fail in this process of individuation, which is also the 384 PART FOUR process of becoming a real human, means being sent to join the swarming masses of the collectively unsatisfied dead. Once again, then, Corbin with his monos pros monon isn't just listing another quick topic of conversation between him and Jung on one September day in 1955. On the contrary, he is describing the secret dynamic of the conversation itself; the innermost nature of their interaction; the spirit instructing the dance. To anyone else the dance is, naturally, bound to be as inscrutable as the spirit behind it is invisible. Exoterically, people can't stop themselves obsessing over the obvious differences between Corbin and Jung without ever glimpsing what lies beyond. When Corbin describes coming to a place where formally he had to separate from Jung, the last thing they will guess is that he is just noting what two knights will always have to do at the crossroads -- follow their own, lonely path in the search for what both Jung and Corbin knew to be the ultimate mystery of the Grail. Even then the separation is only outer, never inner. But it would never once occur to them that all the outer differences are simply what guarantees the inner aloneness which allows the divine aloneness to flower. And, just as naturally, they'll fail even to register the com- ment made by Corbin in his review about "the ultimate, the unforgivable, truth of the alone to alone". That, as he explains in the obvious hope of not being noticed by anyone unable to understand, is the inexcusable truth of the solitary prophet who is forced to speak out and bear witness to the ultimate aloneness of God."° Only now is it possible to make out the real thread connecting this meeting, in 1955, to the original creation of Jung's Answer to Job. When Corbin looked back at that particular meeting, CATAFALQUE 385 years later, with such affection and regret there was one specific feature of the encounter which still struck him forcefully. This was the way that the theme of music, which is how they'd begun their dialogue, led back even further to Jung's original experience of hearing the book playing itself as if it was music. Right at the start of their discussion, Corbin had taken the initiative of asking Jung how he experienced the real power and virtue of music: its therapeutic virtues, its spiritual power. And what touched him most of all was Jung's reply -- which is that "music only has any purificatory virtue if it leads us into an inner visionary experience, using that word in its strongest and prophetic sense".** Again, for Corbin, every single road he travelled with Jung started and ended with prophecy. This could hardly be less surprising, though, when we consider the main themes and interests that held both men together. One simply has to think of Khidr: the mysterious prophet and inner guide, more real than any outer teacher, who only appears in all his modest greenness to those he allows to see him. And nothing could be less unexpected than the fascination with him these two men shared -- considering that for both of them their teachers happened to be, just like Khidr, invisible prophets of the most special kind." It would be easy to add other examples such as their shared passion for Joachim of Fiore, the Christian prophet who pretended not to be a prophet, and their shared awareness of his crucial importance for any true understanding of the West. But then there are the less obvious cases, like the importance of imagination, which take us straight into the powerhouse of their ideas. Jung's work is famous for the central role it gives to "active imagination"; Corbin's, for the central role it ascribes to what he 386 PART FOUR would call the "imaginal" as opposed to the merely imaginary. And with one, as well as the other, a kind of complacency can make it easy to imagine one knows exactly what each of them means. The reality is, though, that at the back of their ideas about imagination lies one ancient notion known to both of them by its Latin name. That's the idea of imaginatio vera: of real or true imagination. This profoundly paradoxical idea, which derives from ancient Hermetic and mystical traditions, is like the hidden heart beating at the core of everything else they said or did. For both of them alike, and in this they were perfectly at one, it's the forgotten principle that divides reality from all our usual self-indulgent fantasies; our constant imaginary thinking. At the same time this true or real imagination is the power responsible for creating everything around and inside us, from our inner thoughts right out to the stars. It's also the power that can bring us back into the productive, functioning centre of ourselves -- because, as Jung states the matter so succinctly, "the real is what works". And historically, as Corbin knew only too well, this aptitude for "true imagination" is the rare faculty that belongs to one particular kind of person. It always has been reserved, above all, for prophets." Henry Corbin arrived back in Paris from Tehran, for the very last time, at the beginning of 1978: his final return to the West from the place he had come to consider his spiritual home. Inwardly, during the months leading up to his death that October, he was living more and more in a world of prophets -- and of the mysterious inner music he already had discussed with Jung a quarter of a century earlier. Outwardly, right to the end there were people yapping at his heels from every corner wanting their meal; their little pound of flesh. Even so, in the West just as much as anywhere else, his chivalrous ethic held him back from objecting when they twisted or manipulated his writings and ideas to suit their own self-centred ends. His policy was crystal clear. He felt duty bound never to criticize colleagues openly or disagree with them in public; only to emphasize the points on which they agreed; even, if necessary, to invent the points of agreement; and, especially when disappointed or betrayed, to keep addressing individuals as his dear colleague and friend." And among the worst problems he had to face, back in the West, were the Jungians. On one level, in the spirit of collegiality he was happy to offer them his fullest encouragement and support. On another level he was exhausted by them, along with 388 PART FOUR any number of other people or things: sick to death of the way they kept psychologically pushing him over the edge by trying to convert the Sufi ideas he had been introducing to the West into a tool they could exploit with their all-too-human hands. For instance there was the case of James Hillman. Jimmy from New Jersey had a truly brilliant, scintillating, fearless mind. And in a very public move he decided to make not just Carl Jung but also Henry Corbin the two "immediate fathers" of what, eventually, he would choose to refer to as his imaginal psychology. What was kept much less public, and what Stella described to me in the greatest detail on more than one occasion, is how things turned out when Hillman made his pilgrimage to Paris to ask Corbin's blessing for this "imaginal psychology" of his. With only Stella present, Corbin yelled at Hillman for misusing and abusing the language of the Sufis; denounced his appropriation of the word "imaginal" as totally illegitimate; and left the room in a storm after asking his wife to show him out. After that, of course, Corbin's chivalry prevented him from openly offering any criticisms or even the slightest hint of disagreement. And in public Hillman would remain, to the end, his dearest colleague and friend." But this isn't to say that when he felt the full burden of the situation weighing down on him, as it did just a few months before he died, he didn't issue warnings: the clearest, strongest warnings about reducing spiritual truths to the level of trivial intellectualizing and cheap psychologizing. Naturally, though, Hillman paid no notice and neither did anyone else. Or to be a little more precise, American intellectuals would come out in force to criticize Corbin severely for even daring to issue warnings. Everyone, we are told, has the right to make anything out of anything -- and for elders to warn their juniors is nothing but stuffy, old-fashioned, patriarchal authoritarianism. CATAFALQUE 389 And in one of those strange ironies it's safer not to notice, Corbin happened to be more familiar than almost anybody else with the old Persian sacred traditions that vividly depict young people's disrespectful refusal to heed the warnings of their elders as the surest pointer to the dissolution and destruction of a culture; to the death and ending of an age. For him it was an indescribable pain to watch what's most sacred being turned into a plaything and to witness the powerful ancient prophecies being fulfilled right in front of his eyes.*° Nothing could be wider of the mark, though, than to think that the Jungians he encountered would only be a problem for Corbin in his old age. Since first coming into contact with them he had always found their collective unconscious fondness for imitation and clever clichés and second-hand, warmed-over ideas a total travesty of what Jung himself valued above anything else: the fullness of individuation, a total inner aloneness, the willingness to be guided inwardly wherever that guidance leads and "with all the consequences this entails".*' But, by the end of Corbin's life, Jung had already been gone for over fifteen years -- which was a long enough time that, under the pressure of constant bombardment from Jungians, he sometimes mentally forgot what it had all been about. On a certain level, the meetings between the two of them had drifted into almost a distant memory. Even so, the essence never changed. The love and affection, respect and inner gratitude he felt towards Jung ran just as deep." And so did his loyalty. It can be easy to miss the significance of the way that Corbin's closest Iranian collaborator, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, used to keep on taunting and needling him by denouncing Carl Jung as a misguided fraud. Nasr belonged to a band of intellectuals 390 PART FOUR and would-be esotericists who called themselves Traditionalists. Mostly, aside from Nasr himself, these Traditionalists were Europeans who had become converts to Islam and somehow believed this entitled them to speak with authority about all the world's religions -- not to mention everything else, including Jung's psychology. To begin with, some of them had an undeniable quality of piety; even saintliness. And a fair amount of what they said could be a little banal, to be sure, but wise enough. The most noticeable thing was not so much the rigid orthodoxy of their intellectualism as their tendency to pontificate about subjects they simply couldn't understand." In a peculiarly unconscious re-enactment of the full- scale assault by ancient Platonists, almost two thousand years earlier, on the Gnostics they launched the most vicious attacks against Jung -- making all the same mistakes as the Platonists of substituting their supposedly valid beliefs for the immediacy of direct experience, of laying claim to the possession of some "primordial tradition" which was nothing but a manufactured fantasy. They would write at length with the greatest apparent learning about esotericism but without realizing that when you talk like this about the esoteric you turn it, just like Jung's spirit of our time nicely dressing up as the spirit of the depths, into its exact exoteric opposite. And even though many of these Traditionalists were Muslims, the fact had mysteriously escaped them that with all their theorizing they were violating the essential spirit of Islam. In laying out their grand systems and mental schemes they'd forgotten how, according to the Qur'an, every human structure is just another speck of dust waiting to be swept away from the Face of God." CATAFALQUE 391 As a young man, Henry Corbin's initial approach to them had been open-handed as well as diplomatic; but when he came up against the full force of their hidebound righteousness that didn't last for long. And, much later, every time that Nasr chose to lash out at Jung it was Corbin who passionately sprang to his defence. By standing up for Jung he was fighting in support of what, to him, would always be most precious. The truth is that it was Jung, as spokesperson for the unknown spirit of the depths, who had turned into a living embodiment of Khidr -- and it was the so-called Traditionalists who "really hit the roof" when Jung as Khidr appeared on the scene out of nowhere to point people back again towards the source of life. Any superficial differences in opinion between Jung and Corbin faded into insignificance compared to this. That's why, even when Corbin was trying to describe to westerners the realities of spiritual experience in ancient Persia or among Persian Sufis, he found himself being brought straight back to Jung. Or as he explained: we are dealing here with realities which are so subtle and so archetypally powerful but "so alien to our normal modern consciousness that, without the teaching of C.G. Jung, it would be difficult to get any sense of what they mean as a lived experience". And as he also expressed himself far more personally, trying to convey in public his infinite gratitude to Jung: "It was at Eranos that the pilgrim who had arrived from Iran was destined to encounter the one who, through his Answer to Job, made him understand the answer he was bringing inside himself from Iran. The path towards the eternal Sophia'" -- the same Sophia painted by Jung for his Red book as the lived experience of the soul who snatches you away into eternity before helping you, or at least some part of you, to return." 392 PART FOUR But then there is the even more significant fact that Corbin wrote what almost amounted to a whole book, which has just been published recently, about Jung. He wrote it with one key purpose in mind which was to show how, when understood as it should be, Jungian psychology is the only real equivalent for westerners of Zen or Tibetan Buddhism in the East. And it's the only real equivalent because, beyond the dogmatism of Traditionalists as well as the dogmatism of Jungians, it offers direct access to the essence of spiritual experi- ence -- the original "primordial experience", potentially available to all of us in the West but rejected for so long as heretical, which has been banished century after century by the dogmatism of the Christian Church." Naturally there is the strangest paradox here -- that an orientalist who spent the whole of his adult life specializing in Persian traditions and spent half of it feeling at home outside of Europe would point back, so emphatically, to his own western culture. But this is exactly what Corbin did. And it's also why he felt so little sympathy for the western Traditionalists who took what they thought were new identities by converting to Islam and, in some cases, abandoned their own original culture for dead. To him, everything he did in the East was intended as an act of service to the West. He knew he would always, first and foremost, be a westerner; that his ultimate duty was to contribute to the West; to help heal it, rescue it from its forgetfulness, return it to its spiritual source.*° And it's important to understand just what he saw when, as a westerner, he looked at Jung and Jung's psychology -- which for him as an outsider was far more than some specialized technique. It was Jung's knowledge, his real science, of the soul. In the work he wrote about Jung, and about Jung's teaching of individuation, he describes exactly what he found himself CATAFALQUE 393 looking at. I see, he says, the arrival of the dawn. I see the sun rising in the east. But by this he didn't mean the physical east. He meant the inner east: the east inside us all. To reject our western culture by looking to the geographical east for one's identity and true self, for teaching and guidance, is the perfect way to end up lost; to get ripped up, as Corbin quotes directly from Jung, by our roots; or as Jung also says, to forget we ever had a garden and try to feed ourselves by gobbling up foreign fruits. And Corbin explains that this point of the sun rising at a new dawn which he encounters in the work of Jung is the same as the moment of dawn or ishrag in the Sufi teaching of Suhrawardi. It's strange to see how not only did Corbin understand Jung in the light of this Sufi tradition but Jung only felt completely understood by a Sufi.** This could all sound very pretty, except that prettiness is not at all what it's about. What it is about is the last thing we want to know about, which is the responsibility we have as westerners to face the darkness of our own culture without looking away. And nothing could be more wrong than to imagine that Corbin was too spiritual to face this inner darkness. He didn't talk too much about it because he saw that as Jung's job; but he knew perfectly well when to face the darkness, and how. It can be very useful to study and learn from eastern teachings -- except when you try to use them to cover over the darkness and emptiness you feel inside. They may be able to throw some light on your problem, but they are never going to solve it. And they aren't going to solve it because the only real solution ever comes from the problem itself. When Corbin wanted to illustrate this he turned back, appropriately enough, to western legends of the Grail. The best way he knew of making his point was to quote the beautiful 394 PART FOUR saying: Seule guérit la blessure la lance qui la fit, "The wound is only healed by the lance that made it." Jung, too, was intimately familiar with this same situation in the Grail legend -- this impossible task of healing the wound through the instrument that caused it. On one hand, of course, this was precisely his task. On the other, when he talked about it in objective terms, he described this work of returning to heal the gaping wound caused so long ago as the impossible work of the equally impos- sible saviour or Saoshyant; of the precious jewel, father of all prophets, who comes back after thousands of years bringing a completely new revelation. And just how impossible this task is starts to become clear when one finds the courage, if only for a moment, to face that individual but also collective emptiness and darkness inside oneself -- without trying to do anything, such as thinking good thoughts or inventing childish schemes, to fill the hole.* Shortly before he died, Jung recalled a prophecy his soul had told him -- predicting his future when, almost half a century earlier, he still was immersed in the work he was doing on the Red book. She had prophesied that first he would be drawn and quartered; then the different parts of him would be thrown onto scales to be weighed before being sold off. Like so many shamanic realities, this prophecy had the profoundest significance along with the crudest of implications. And helped along by everyone who has no time for the reality of the soul, or the mysteries of prophecy, what she described is precisely what happened. As soon as somebody turned up, especially from America, with the exciting news that another organization had been created for training potential future Jungians he'd feel crushed: devastated. Also, far closer to home, it was only thanks to a great deal of artful blackmail and trickery that people were finally able to persuade him to accept the inevitability of an institute being founded at Zurich in his name. But even at the grand opening in 1948 he had trouble concealing his grudgingness or reluctance about the whole affair. Somehow the words managed to slip out that "My grandfather, Carl Gustav Jung once founded a home for retarded children. Now I am founding one for retarded adults." And 396 PART FOUR behind what he said was the implication, as always, that people wanting to understand his work simply had themselves to blame if they tried consulting those who claim to act or speak in his name. T'hey should go straight to his books, instead. Occasionally he did decide to turn up at the new institute, but not often. In line with his usual philosophy of non-interference he deliberately, and very humorously, kept aloof; left everybody to do the kinds of things they were going to do anyway, make fools of themselves according to their choosing, draw their own conclusions, cause all the usual confusions.*° There was just one single condition he insisted on when agreeing to so much hocus-pocus, because it was the only thing that to him really counted. This was that the primary aim and focus of the Zurich institute would be to pursue interdisciplinary research into a whole range of subjects he took great care to list and name. That it would become a place for training therapists was the last possible purpose he had in mind. In fact even the institute's director stated, right from the start, that to create training courses for would-be Jungians would be a total absurdity because the individuation process for every individual person is so utterly unique. Soon enough, though, the institute had been turned into a training centre for producing future Jungians while any plans for in-depth research were abandoned. And, thanks to that peculiar inverting of reality one so often encounters in such situations, it didn't take long before people were looking back amazed at Jung's failure to grasp the true aim of the institute or understand what its purpose was meant to be." This is how delicately, but persistently and insidiously, history is rewritten. In Jung's own name, officially and very efficiently, Jungians were managing to get rid of Jung. Naturally there could and still can be any number of plausible excuses, round-about reasonings, in-depth defences to justify the ongoing march of CATAFALQUE 397 evolution. But the result was described with horrifying simplicity by Wolfgang Pauli -- the famous physicist, and collaborator with Jung in their work on synchronicity, who had been invited to serve as scientific patron before threatening to resign because the institute had totally betrayed its principles. According to him the grandly named C.G. Jung Institute had already devolved into a conveyor belt aimed at the mass production of what can never be reproduced; into some kind of Faustian assembly-line mentality although, of course, inbuilt in this mentality is a refusal to see the truth about itself. And there is more than a little irony in the fact that it was Pauli as a scientist who felt he had to defend the unconscious against therapists who were professional experts at ruining their patients' dreams.*® But it wasn't only Wolfgang Pauli who happened to see things this way. Henry Corbin, too, stood appalled as he watched those who called themselves Jungians taking the discoveries made by Jung in the depths of the unconscious and then converting them into mechanical tools -- into little instruments or some kind of auto- matic apparatus they can conveniently switch on in any and every situation regardless of how appropriate, or inappropriate, the device might happen to be. For him, as for Pauli, it was a horror to see people with their collective fantasies about individuation turning discoveries of such profundity into such mechanical and even destructive clichés. In the case of Corbin, though, what astonished him most of all wasn't the Jungians. It was the fact that, when he mentioned his very negative impressions to Jung, Jung immediately and from the core of his whole being agreed.*" There is no real need to say that actually there was no need to be so surprised. Jung himself had made it only too clear in his writings how painfully aware he was of the tendency for well-meaning followers and disciples to get everything back to 398 PART FOUR front by confusing discoveries with dogmas; by never learning truly to explore or discover for themselves; by snatching at the end result of someone else's learning experience "in the hope of making the process repeat itself" and, in so doing, "turning the whole process upside down". "This", as Jung adds, is how it happened in the past "and how it still happens today." Then there are all the times he used to write about the endless rubbish his pupils loved fabricating and inventing on the basis of things he himself had said, or published; about all the people who claim to speak as legitimate representatives in his name but essentially don't have a clue "what it's all about". And that's not even to mention his own observations of how, at those moments which matter most, the so-called "Jungian gang" were neither better nor wiser than any other perfectly ordinary humans -- let alone the observations made by others about how quickly Jungians could turn into little more than monsters." But as for what it is that Henry Corbin found most surprising in Jung's full-bodied response: Jungians have already enjoyed for years playing around with the report that once, in an exasperated although humorous mood, Jung had announced to a group of his followers "Thank God I am Jung and not a Jungian." What they apparently are not aware of is that this was much more than some kind of in-joke intended for Jungians alone. As a matter of fact Stella Corbin used to describe to me how Jung physically came alive from tip to toe at the exact same moment he would say these words, to her and her husband, each time they met in private. And she remembered in particular when the two Corbins were leaving Jung's Zurich home one evening and, still standing on the doorstep, he boomed out at them through the night: "Thank God I'm not a Jungian!" This problem of Jungians was inseparable, to his mind, from the problem of institutes created in his name as well as from the CATAFALQUE 399 even bigger problem of the future that lay ahead for his work. And it's no accident at all that -- when he spoke about the Zurich institute, in particular, to people he trusted -- his forecast was rather bleak. At times he would describe it as coming along well enough, only to add what a danger there is of professional teachers and teaching systematically killing off every true idea. That, he adds, is the sad fate one can hardly escape; but with a great deal of care it should be possible, at best, to keep the boat "afloat for a while" and help those archetypal ideas to live out their destiny whether inside the institute or outside it. And then he notes that no real truth can ever be destroyed, however desperately people try to wipe it out. He also could be even more specific, though, about all the problems of followers and disciples -- insisting that "the Institute would be lucky if it did not outlive its creative uses within a generation". With other teachers and teachings sprouting up everywhere, all of them bursting to promote themselves into eternity, Jung's grim view about the future of any organization created in hisname might sound like an extraordinary testimony to his scientific modesty. But to understand his statements that way would be to misinterpret them entirely, because he wasn't comparing his own work to the work of some modern scientist. He was comparing it to the work of Christ. For him, every- thing he said about living ideas and the impossibility of keeping them alive in an institutional organization was based directly on his understanding of what happened to Christ's teaching as it was absorbed; totally transformed; killed off bit by bit by the Christian Church. Everything, naturally, has its place in the grand scheme of things. As he used to say: the spirit and fire of the Christ had to vanish, be stamped out, so that the lovers of institutionalism 400 PART FOUR could exist. The birth of the Church was simply Christ's second crucifixion and death. And, after that, the only way the spirit of Christ could stay alive was inside the heart of a few hidden heretics and mystics. Aside from them, the institutions of Christianity would turn into exactly what he predicted would happen to the world of Jungians as soon as he died. Both of them, the one just like the other, would be taken over by the official quackery of priestly posers enthusiastically peddling their fake remedies and dead imitations. But there is one other detail in this picture which can be easy to miss -- because even Jung's virtual prophecy that the institute in Zurich was unlikely to stay alive for more than a single generation is nowhere near as arbitrary as it might seem. That great predecessor of his in the lineage of heretics and Gnostics he belonged to was the prophet Mani; and it was Mani who stated, very specifically, that only the words preserved inside the prophets' own books are capable of keeping their teaching alive. For all those prophets who failed to take due precautions by either not writing any books, or writing too few, the corruption of their teachings was guaranteed. "Their first disciples already had misunderstood them, and the misunderstandings had multi- plied from generation to generation ... so that in the end the kernel of truth was completely lost in the medley of error." And that effortlessly brings us to the same point where we started because, "from the Manichaean point of view, the traditional enemies of the other religions were not greater sinners than their apostles, teachers, and propagators. All of them were equally guilty of leading mankind astray from the path of the truth."" It's not a very welcome surprise nowadays to hear Jung placed back, again, in his own spiritual context because suddenly everything risks making too much sense. And none of this is very good news for any of those many Jungians who have made a business of modernizing and streamlining him; of adapting his psychology to the realities of the twenty-first century by efficiently arranging its exit from the claptrap of disreputable texts such as his Red book. The greatest trouble with such attempts at modernization was always going to be that, to arrange a successful exit from something, one first has to understand what's being exited -- but really to understand that, in this case, is to realize there can be no possible exit at all. And the neglected reality this all comes back to is, for Jung, the fact that everything meaningful or worthwhile depends absolutely on the divine will. Each book he ever wrote came to him as a divine task, commissioned by the unconscious. At the same time each genuine contact that he or his books ever happened to have, with anybody anywhere in the world, was the direct result of a divine "grace" working mysteriously beyond the understanding of any human. 402 PART FOUR He was aware of being able to make himself immediately present through his published words to individuals living in different places, other countries; and this unmediated contact has nothing to do with the structures of institutions or organizations because, as he explains, it has nothing to do with space and nothing to do with time. In fact a person doesn't even need to read a word Jung has written, but just hear something about him, to be given instant access to the innermost secret of his being: to what he calls "the divine cause of my existence". And as he adds, sounding strangely like Christ, "Conforming to the divine will I live for mankind, not only for myself, and whoever understands this message contained in and conveyed by my writing will also live for me." Everything else -- including any other book written about him or even by him -- is a total waste of time unless it, too, is produced in conformity with the will of the divine. And as for the forming of Jungian institutes or organizations, certainly any- one could claim that these also have been willed by the divine. But, just as definitely, that won't be the same divine will which Jung himself had in mind.* Of course his pessimistic prophesying is not going to be the best of news, either, for the many Jungians who are more spiritually inclined -- who look up to him as ushering in the glorious new age of Aquarius, who believe the Christification of the many is well underway and are ready to come together to celebrate an unprecedented new era of learning how to co-create with the divine, who recognize in the Red book's publication a wonderfully synchronistic sign of our collective advancement to the stage where the whole of his teaching can at last be absorbed and understood. It would be too much to hope such people might realize that all this speculative frenzy is nothing but a transposition of the CATAFALQUE 403 brutal modern fantasy about material progress from an economic onto a spiritual plane. It's exactly the same euphoria; the same insane manipulation of facts and figures; the identical dishonesty and self-deception. The reality is that fifty Red books can be discovered or published, a hundred, and if we don't know how to read them they will make no difference at all. Each time we clap ourselves on the back for our increasing familiarity with Jung we walk in exactly the opposite direction from Jung himself, who had the terrible modesty to stand face to face with his idiocy and came to understand less and less about anything as he grew older. As for the Red book itself, it's about our own blood. The true synchronicity has nothing to do with flushed egos but with the fact that, when he started work on it, the world was being faced with a major calamity -- while when the book came to be published, almost a century later, the world would be facing calamities far greater. And unless we are prepared to go even deeper into the darkness of the unconscious than Jung went, unless we are willing to find the superhuman strength it takes to laugh as he did at the prospect of total destruction, we don't stand a chance of getting close to the real spirit and fire. As for that Christification of the many: Jung gave good reasons why it luckily hasn't happened yet, which means the Christ is still free to come and go with the breeze. As for co-creating with the divine, or becoming divine, the only divinity Jung could find the honesty to speak about was the superhumanly divine power we together now have to destroy ourselves." And that just leaves the age of Aquarius. To be sure, Jung was able to speak as a visionary of a "new religion" which finally will emerge six hundred years in the future -- of the gigantic temple already starting to be built 404 PART FOUR invisibly by countless people "in India and China and in Russia and all over the world". But there are some essential aspects of such a vision that we owe it to ourselves to take note of. First, it's quite clear from Jung's account that this vast temple whose foundation and pillars are already being built by any number of people everywhere around the world isn't just the work of Jungians. Its structure, and nature, reach far beyond that. Second, those few people involved with him who here or there are truly working for the future are helping in their small way to build not the new psychology but what he refers to as "the new religion' -- one more sign out of a thousand that for Jung his work was always, first and foremost, a matter of religion. And third, this isn't the only place where he happens to talk about a period six hundred years in the future. Quite to the contrary: he also used to explain that he was perfectly resigned to the prospect of his own work not being recognized or acknowledged for a very long time. In fact he anticipated a future where it simply would disappear, along with pretty much everything else, due to war or an age of "barbarian disintegration". His one slender hope was that "ifour civilization survives or somewhere mankind survives, perhaps in Australia or God knows where", then his work might somewhere or somehow be dug up once more. And in that case he would share the fate of Meister Eckhart whose work was buried and forgotten for six hundred years, then suddenly got dug up again so people could realize he was one of the most important mystics who had ever lived. Here, too, there are some crucial points to take note of. Once again, nowhere is there the smallest trace of him wanting to be remembered as a famous scientist because again it's all a matter of religion: of comparing himself, a lonely figure in the modern world, to one of the few greatest mystics from the Middle Ages. CATAFALQUE 405 But that's only the least of what Jung here is actually saying. For him the most likely future lying ahead of us all is global annihilation, massive war, the catastrophic descent into barbarism on the part of a civilization which had existed for thousands of years. And if -- only "if" -- some tiny remnant of that civilization still happens to survive after the coming period of utter destruction, then there is a distant chance of his work being dug up somewhere so it can be a part of the new world. Of course, on the large scale, that doesn't speak well for the survival of our own world or for the continuity of everything we have come to consider ours. On a vastly smaller scale it's also another little dent in the self-importance of organized Jungians, because none of their busyness is going to make the tiniest real difference; isn't going to change the inevitable outcome in the slightest. If six hundred years in the future Jung's work is dug up, just as Meister Eckhart's had been dug up, that will be due to the grace inherent in his work itself and won't have anything to do with the interpretations or misinterpretations imposed by followers. For a long while, Tibet has had its tradition of terma: spiritual treasures which are buried and forgotten during the darkest of times only to get dug up by someone, or spontaneously reveal themselves, when the time is due. But the West has its own tradition of these buried treasures, too." Now it should be clear why, in the greater scheme of things, Jung had so little energy for helping Jungians along with their institutional dreams. It should be even clearer, though, that what lies ahead for humanity in Jung's own mind is much more than just a speed bump or two. Instead, what he inwardly foresaw was the darkest period of forgetfulness. And this brings us straight to the most important point of all. 406 PART FOUR Always Jung would emphasize that the future is totally alien and incomprehensible to us in the present. Any life and earth and new humanity will be so completely different in the age of Aquarius that it's a waste of time to speculate about them in our old, dying age. He explained how one aeon always provides the seeds and the seedbed for the aeon to come. But, as the ancient Gnostics pointed out, no one tries to sow in summer or harvest in winter. And as Jung pointed out, what the seeds planted now will sprout into is none of our business to be sticking our noses into; is none of our concern. What is our concern is what none of us, rushing towards our doom, has too much time left for -- which is to learn about our real culture and psychology by learning, naturally with the help of Latin or Greek, about our past. The first thing to appreciate is that times of transition from one age into another are always intensely difficult. Then the second is that any transition becomes not just difficult, but more or less impossible, when the lessons of the age being left behind haven't been fully learned. This is why Jung as prophet placed so much internal emphasis on his private life of voluntary suffering and conscious sacrifice, and is why those commentators and interpreters who quaintly claim his psychology was aimed at transcending all the Christian values couldn't be more wrong. It's why he also emphasized that, sinking as we are into a state of darkness, we are still living inside the Christian aeon of Pisces which means "we shall need Christian virtues fo the utmost", and it's why, far from abandoning those close to him, he kept supporting and encouraging them. After all, a little encouragement in the face of the impossible is always welcome. We have to understand that prophets involved in the impossible work of saving the world from itself aren't interested in profit and loss. They don't do what they do for the sake of failure, or success. CATAFALQUE 407 They do it because they have to. But, needless to say, that doesn't in any way lighten the abysmal darkness lying ahead. To fantasize about a new world or a new humanity hundreds of years away is utter futility because the only thing worthy of us as conscious humans is to confront, with all our strength and honesty, our own present along with its immediate future. What he saw in this particular transition was something far worse than the usual affair, at such times, of mass melancholy and despair. "Now we are coming to Aquarius', as he wrote to a friend, "and we are standing only at the very beginning of this apocalyptic development!" And, as he would do more than once, he quoted a Latin text from the ancient Sibylline oracles that contains an old visionary prophecy not exactly in line with the new-age celebrations of an Aquarian age: Luciferi vires accendit Aquarius acres, "Aquarius sets on fire the savage powers of Lucifer.'*° During the last year of his life, the man who had helped so many people through their depression fell into the deepest depression. In November 1960 Jung wrote some words of explanation to the same Englishman to whom he also wrote, with such sim- plicity, about the utter ordinariness of living an archetypal life -- and about never suspecting the darkness of the modern world could be so dense. He described, for Eugene Rolfe, how a disease which had just almost killed him is what forced him "to understand, that I was unable to make the people see, what 1 am after. I am practically alone. There are a few; who understand this and that, but almost nobody, that sees the whole." And he asked: "Why should I live any longer? My wife is dead, my children are all away and married. I have failed in my foremost task, to open people's eyes to the fact, that man has a soul and that there is a buried treasure in the field and that our religion and philosophy is in a lamentable state. Why indeed should I continue to exist?' But he wouldn't be left alone with his questionings for long. Rolfe was so touched by the letter, he shared it with leading Jungians in London. News about it spread and soon people were flocking around, as they still are, to convince themselves his sense of failure was nothing real; just a momentary lapse; that CATAFALQUE 409 he didn't stay depressed for long and soon was fully back to normal. Also, they've been quick to answer his questions for him -- more firmly and intensely as time goes by. Of course, they tell him, you didn't fail! If only you could look at us now, fifty years on, you would see that we are the ones you were waiting for. You have no idea how fast humanity has moved forward since you died. Thanks to you there has been such a collective awakening, so much progress in making the unconscious conscious, that what people couldn't dream of understanding while you were alive we understand quite easily now. You sowed the seeds. We are the fruit. Needless to say, no one with the exception of Rolfe was very much concerned about Jung: only about themselves, their reputations, especially their self-justification. And in that, they showed themselves incapable either of seeing the whole or of understanding what he was after. Also, they don't seem to have realized that in making their grand claims to be just the ones he was dreaming of -- in warming up the fake Native American prophecy that we are the ones we have been waiting for or, according to the latest popular Jungian jargon, "we are the leaders we have been waiting for' -- they might be precisely the reason why, looking ahead, Jung became so depressed in the first place.** Failure, for true prophets, is absolutely guaranteed. It's also why, to the extent that their message is left alone, they will always be unpopular. And the eagerness to see the seeds sown by Jung already bearing fruit might sound ever so humanly natural except that, in the greater scheme of things, it's to miss the most essential purpose of his work. The real fruit lies, if anywhere, hundreds of years down the line -- even though in our own world of instant self-gratification it can seem inconceivable to think of anything taking so long. 410 PART FOUR And as for that modern cliché about making the unconscious conscious: it can sound immensely impressive when talked about this way. Sometimes a little reality check is helpful, though. Jung, himself, was so concerned with maintaining the balance between consciousness and unconsciousness that he tended to view this exclusive emphasis on making the unconscious conscious as a summary of Freud's intentions rather than his own. The law is that, from generation to generation, some things can be made conscious only for others to slip back into unconsciousness; new virtues come into play while old ones fall away on the spinning wheel of time. And where Jung is concerned, few things could matter more right now than to note how -- during his last months alive -- his ideas about consciousness profoundly changed. There had always been a lingering hint of ambiguity in the importance and value he attached to consciousness. But finally, through his meditations, he was taken into states where he left any trace of conscious awareness far behind and admitted that at the end of the day "he does not trust consciousness in the usual sense any more'.*" Eventually he managed, in a manner of speaking, towards the end of 1960 to snap out of his depression -- even if not straight away. That, in a nutshell, was the beauty of his two personalities. He was, just like Henry Corbin, a master of appearances and disguises; accomplished showman; prodigious diplomat. Right to the end he knew how to smile radiantly for group photographs, enjoy tasting the best of wines. His personality no.1, with its expansive worldliness and joviality, had all the massive grandeur of the swankiest American hotel in Chicago or New York. It was positively presidential." CATAFALQUE 411 But, underneath, there was something even more massive going on: something no amount of showmanship could manage to hide. And, if you wanted, you could call it war. War was, literally, the ultimate source of his most creative and significant work. It had been the prophetic dreams and visions which kept haunting him during the months before the start of the First World War that would lead him to begin the work on his Red book from which so much else would come. Still, though, it's not just that Jung was already aware of impending disaster before war ever broke out. He stayed aware of war's dark reality even after the worst seemed over. When the Second World War at last gave way to peace, most people in Europe were only too happy to begin breathing again; throw themselves into the process of restoration and starting anew; optimistically get back to living life as usual. But Jung couldn't, because he knew western culture was over. To him Europe was nothing more than a "rotting carcass", and he could clearly see the same things that anyone whose eyes were open at the time would have seen towards the end of the Roman Empire. For him the nightmare of war had brought the world not to peace, but to "the precincts of hell". And although it can feel wonderful to go on enjoying what little still survives of a great civilization, deep inside themselves the people know that it's just "a remnant and that its days are counted". To Jung, in his awareness, there was no snapping out of the grimness of war; no return to normal. And he was simply forced to stay immersed in that awareness all the time -- because if you are concerned in the real sense with saving and preserving the world, that's exactly what you have to do. If you can't stop people from acting out their need to go to war, there is ultimately no point in fighting the inevitable. Then 412 PART FOUR at least you have to salvage, and protect, the secret essence of their culture so that its seeds or embers can be kept alive for some distant future through all the destruction which is still to come."! Jung had been trained very well as a lord of war by the spirits of war. His job was to go where no one else will; do and say what others will do their best to forget. While everyone else tries as well as possible to get on with their little business, swallow the fabricated news they are fed and then regurgitate it as verdicts that are never theirs, he would have none of it. As he explained in the Red book, the real reason he could see war coming was because he carried the war inside him. But then, of course, there is no avoidance or escape. Then you are forced to breathe with the inhuman as well as the human, to heave with the sea. And it's no coincidence that the alchemists described this inner fight to perfection -- the immensity of the internal struggle, the "fighting and violence and war". Appreciating the ways Jung loved living in harmony and sympathy with nature can seem relatively easy. At the same time, though, he was so completely committed to what alchemy calls the work opposed to nature that it can be hard to notice its markers or signs. One of the simplest examples is the fact that the deeper he had to sink into the unconscious for the sake of his writing, the worse his sleep would be disturbed. Over the span of a human 414 PART FOUR lifetime, this all takes its toll so that what for others is sleep and normalcy is never quite normal any more. And it's touching to see how, up until the month before he died, he kept struggling and fighting with his weakened body just so he could bring the writing to an end.>? But then there is also what happened in 1944, seventeen years before his death when he nearly died. People love reading as well as writing about the mystical experiences he had at the time, out on the boundary line between living and dying. Even so, almost no one cares about what he described as happening next -- because for us humans even the greatest experiences of blissful ecstasy or mystical union take their toll, ruin us just a little more. He described the torment and torture of being forced back into this flat, grey, box-like material world. He talked about the unbearable restrictedness and clumsiness and crudeness of physical existence which, of course, is the existence we humans happily run around in with all our subjective dramas of suffering and aspirations and illusions. He explained what an agony it was, literally, to leave the inexpressible fullness of objective reality behind and exchange it for such hollowness, to be separated from the objective world of true imagination beyond our rational fantasies and crazy imaginings. With an honesty that can hardly be appreciated except by those who have experienced what he is referring to, he admits how infuriating and irritating he found everything on his return -- making a mockery of every easy cliché about psychological integration. And one devastating implication of what he is saying is that the famous experience of mystical union, the tremendous secret of the mysterium coniunctionis kept hidden from us so well, doesn't take place on the physical level of existence at all. It doesn't take place here for the simple reason that, just as the Gnostics used to say, this material world is nothing but the CATAFALQUE 415 crudest of illusions. The real mystery of union belongs to another reality, not ours; and compared to that reality our physical world, for all its importance, is impossibly empty and pale. He also makes a point of not only saying but repeating like the ancient Gnostics, just like Mani, just like Persian Sufis such as Suhrawardi, that this physical existence he had to return to is a prison. The trouble is that, once you have experienced it as a prison, you don't wake up one day and -- because the sun just so happens to be shining -- the bars and the cage are suddenly gone. As Jung himself points out: even though he managed to find his way around again inside his hideous little box and objectively accept it with all its idiotic limitations, for the rest of his life he would always remember it was nothing more than a box. True freedom, once tasted, is something we never forget; and the fact is that, after such an experience, the greater part of us never comes back because it simply couldn't fit inside the prison. Then there is only a little bit of us left here while the rest of us remains behind. And this is why, especially when he was writing, it became more and more obvious to the people near him that he was living in another world. It's why, in finishing his last major book, he came up against the experience of transcendence -- because to arrive at such a paradoxical place of being impersonally present while, at the same time, profoundly absent you need to be more inhuman than human. It's also why, during the last few months before actually dying, he spent so much time immersed "in an 'in between' state" where our human feelings tend to count for very little and all our normalcies become just a distant memory: a state he had always known about but never had the chance to sink into so deeply.* Of course, though, most of the people around him were far too well adapted to a life behind bars to know anything about existence beyond the prison or about the inner realities of war. And there is more than a little to learn from the story of Michael 416 PART FOUR Fordham, who in many respects was the most influential of the British Jungians; a chief editor of Jung's collected works; and who has been described as being, together with James Hillman, one of the "two major original figures following in the wake of Jung". The letter that Jung had ended up writing to Eugene Rolfe, describing his sense of total failure and the inability of anyone to understand his work as a whole, fell into Fordham's hands. Reading Jung's confession to his sense of total failure, not to mention his lament about no one understanding his work as a whole, he was none too pleased -- and jumped on a plane to Zurich. "I believe that I was, if not the last visitor to Kusnacht, very nearly so, before Jung's death", Fordham explained. "When I arrived he was in his dressing-gown looking very frail. I told him about the letter and how distressed I was about it. 1 then went on to say how we in England were in a strong position to rebut open misunderstandings and were striving to further recognition of his work. As I talked I started to realize that Jung did not want to hear such reassurances. He seemed to become weaker and weaker, looking at me as if I were a poor fool who did not know a thing. He did not reply but, after a short time, he rose from his chair and I thought he was going to have a fit. All he said was: 'Fordham, you had better go' and I walked out of the room feeling sad and a failure. I think he died, if not the next day, at least in the next few days." That feeling of failure, not only Jung's but now also his, lingered with Fordham for the rest of his own life. He supposed it must have been Jung's concern for the survival of humanity, as he went on to speculate, and his intense engagement with such "profound matters that had made him feel that he had not succeeded in his mission. When I came to see him I did not CATAFALQUE 417 touch on these matters but spoke superficially. If I had not done that I would have had to convey my thought that it was the delusion of being a world saviour that made him feel a failure." Here was one of the greatest Jungians, editor of his published works, who never noticed Jung's delicate insistence that behind the delusion of being a world saviour lies the true inner work of selflessly safeguarding the world -- just as behind the delusion of being a prophet lie the agonizingly timeless realities of prophecy. And this just goes to show that you can get on as many planes as you like without ever taking the first step. At the end of his life in 1961, Jung had visions no one wants to know about. For the few details that still survive we are dependent on his closest collaborator, Marie-Louise von Franz -- and an interview she gave in her rough-and-ready English almost twenty years after Jung had died. When she was asked by her interviewer for the truth about what had happened, her answer was edgy and abrupt: "I don't want to speak much about it. But he tried to convey to his family some things when he was right dying, and they didn't get the point, so he called for me. But they wouldn't let me be called. But one of his daughters took notes, and after his death she gave them to me. There is a drawing with a line going up and down, and underneath is "The last fifty years of humanity' and some remarks about the final catastrophe being ahead. But I have only those notes." The interviewer asked her to say how such a prospect made her feel. "One's whole feeling revolts against this idea!", she answered. "But since I have those notes in a drawer, I don't allow myself to be too optimistic." Even so, she adds, she does try to pray that the catastrophe of humanity being destroyed along with the rest of life on our planet won't happen -- that a miracle will happen instead, because CATAFALQUE 419 "I think one shouldn't give up. If you think of Answer to Job: if man would wrestle with God, if man would tell God that He shouldn't do it, if we would reflect more, we might just sneak round the corner with not too big a catastrophe." And on that more hopeful note, relaxing ever so slightly, she brings the subject to a close by offering one final detail. "When I saw Jung last, he also had a vision while I was with him. But there he said, "1 see enormous stretches devastated, enormous stretches of the earth. But, thank God, it's not the whole planet.' So, perhaps, that is what lies ahead." There are just a few points here, after everything said in this book, that perhaps still need to be made; and the first has to do with Jung's family refusing to call von Franz. There is something remarkable about how consistent families can be in denying the requests of the dying. I know of a man whose one, final wish while still in his own home was to call for the family cat to be brought and placed on his belly. But his wife and daughter would have none of such nonsense. And it's not that the business of dying is far too frantic, or serious, to allow for any distractions. It's that the wishes of the dying have to be denied as a matter of principle, for the sake of control, because to give in to them would be to give in to death itself: to end up getting sucked into its chaotic swirl. By refusing to grant what a dying person asks for, the family stubbornly holds on; unconsciously ensures that the wishes of the living win out over the wishes of death. And often this is only the beginning of an even more unconscious process that keeps dragging everyone downwards, generation after generation. Family members can take control of the dead person's memory, money, reputation, books -- but they have absolutely nothing because the spirit is already gone. And only by consciously, collectively, allowing such a spirit to go free can they ever free themselves. 420 PART FOUR The second point has to do with that vision von Franz mentions at the end: the vision he had in her presence, the last time she ever saw him, when he was shown vast stretches of the earth altogether devastated and supposedly said to her "thank God it's not the whole planet". In theory and on paper, to anybody with little direct experience of visionary realities, that probably sounds just fine. Psychologically, though -- and we do happen to be talking here about psychologists -- it's totally wrong. Even blissful visions of mystical union can be powerful enough, in their sheer rawness, to wreck a human being. But visions of catastrophe are far more devastating for any healthy person, let alone for a sick and weakened old man on the edge of death. You don't just jump out of such a vision so you can announce with your conscious mind "thank God that's not too bad", and calmly assess it from outside. You are physically held inside it; caught in its lingering aura. And if Jung was really the one who said "thank God it's not the whole planet" -- rather than von Franz letting her memory impose the comment on him -- this will have been the result of her insistently questioning him, as he struggled the best he could to communicate, and dragging out of him some reassurance because that's what she wanted to hear. Of course this already adds a little wrinkle to the smooth continuity of Jungian tradition which not everyone might be glad to accept. In 2013 I brought up the subject with von Franz's interviewer and suggested that perhaps her instinctive need to soften the harshness of Jung's prophecies might have helped to throw a cloak over his own experiences. But, with a commendable firmness, the lady who had interviewed her stated she would have absolutely none of that. Such speculation, she insisted, would be completely meaningless CATAFALQUE 421 and lead to utter confusion. Marie-Louise von Franz, with her unfailing thoroughness and carefulness, makes it quite clear that after Jung's vision of total destruction she visited him on a quite separate occasion and during this visit he had a second vision -- a vision of far less devastation. To be sure, she admitted, this second vision indicated that the devastation would be enormous; but the prospect now was nowhere near as bad because, unlike with the first vision, there would be no destruction of humanity or end to life on our planet. And it would be so nice to end the discussion here, except that what she was telling me so firmly and forcefully is wrong. That second, and supposedly softer, vision is the one Jung had in von Franz's presence when she saw him last. But according to her partner and housemate, Barbara Hannah, the last time she ever saw Jung was eight days before he died. And on the other hand nothing could be easier than to understand what von Franz meant by her odd statement that he had his, supposedly first, vision about the terrifying end of humanity "when he was right dying". "Right", here, is clearly the best she could do in English to find a direct equivalent for the German word -- "gerade" -- which means "just", "exactly", "at precisely the same moment". In other words, the vision Jung is supposed to have seen first was experienced by him right at the moment of death; and the vision that supposedly came afterwards had in fact come to him a week earlier. The second vision is the first and the first is the last. As the Gnostics knew, as Empedocles understood so well, we humans can't help inverting the logic and sequence of reality. Every time we come up against something important, our minds infallibly end up getting everything back to front and upside down. Through her very understandable reluctance to discuss such a horrible subject, or confront it directly, von Franz has 422 PART FOUR created a perfect example of the ancient phenomenon known as "ring composition" -- starting by complaining that she doesn't want to speak about it, ending by trying as hard as she can to sound some optimistic note, while tucking away what mattered most of all in the middle. And the absurdest part of this magical drama, this modern- day re-enactment of the avoidance rituals surrounding what used to be considered taboo, is that it's totally unnecessary. It completely misses the point because the contrast imagined by von Franz between ultimate destruction and a destruction that "only" devastates enormous stretches of the earth, between Jung's first vision and the second, is no real contrast at all. Traditionally it has always been understood that -- in those gigantic catastrophes which wipe out virtually every last remnant of humanity -- somehow and somewhere a few tiny seeds or embers will manage to survive. A part of the prophetic design, just as much for ancient Greeks as ancient Sumerians or Babylonians or Jews, is that there has to be some Noah. Naturally, though, that doesn't help everyone else very much. And with her optimistic version of only enormous stretches of our planet being destroyed, Marie-Louise von Franz was just clutching at straws. But that's exactly what we are reduced to when we end up hiding someone's final vision away in a drawer.» At death the rules change, and all of a sudden you are entering another domain: the domain of the contrary. What used to be valid no longer is. What once was import- ant no longer matters, which is why dying means having to learn how to live in a totally different way. And someone with Jung's natural intelligence would instinctively do what he did in the months before -- start dying before dying by withdrawing more and more from our normal consciousness, dive deeper and then deeper into the unknown. That's what, traditionally, has always been understood as the preparation for death: needing to develop a new organ as if one suddenly is having to discover how to function in water or a fish is being forced to adapt to breathing on dry land. But what's often even tougher than the ordeals of learning how to die is the challenge of facing the utter incomprehension of the people one is leaving behind. At the time of Jung's final vision about the last fifty years of humanity, in June 1961, his immediate family not only didn't get the point or have the slightest clue what he was going through. They even refused to call the one person who, theoretically, might have. Then she in turn -- instead of passing on to others what he'd gone to so much effort to have recorded when he hardly 424 PART FOUR could use his voice to speak, his hands to gesture or draw -- just shut it away for the rest of her life inside a drawer. Of course you could say she was within her rights to do so, which she definitely was; that her decision was eminently sensible for the sake of keeping the Jungian enterprise optimistic, credible, afloat. In fact you could claim that, in shutting the evidence away inside a drawer, she was doing no more than repeating what Jung had done when he shut the Red book away from the public inside his home. And, at the same time, she had just knocked the last nail into the coffin of Jung as a prophet. There were plenty of other nails. His own family would also act quickly and promptly to knock all such gruesome rumours on the head: take every necessary step to erase any hint at Jung's prophetic powers from his biography. Marie -- Louise von Franz, too, would play her dutifully reasonable part in squashing his reputation as a prophet -- along with a fair amount of the truth, as well.°° But that was the least of it. Jung's secretary, Aniela Jaffé, has led any number of people astray by silencing his own confession that he was forced to put the work on his Red book aside because of its wildly prophetic nature -- and by creating, in spite of his urgent warnings, the total fiction that he ended up having to lay it aside because he found it too "aesthetic"."' Then there has been the steady rush of Jungians ever since, stamping out any manifestation of Jung the prophet as fast as they can. Just in the last few years, since the Red book was published, they have had a field day discrediting or disposing of every single reference to prophecy they possibly could. And in doing so they have managed to justify all his doubts about allowing the book to be published: have demonstrated, to CATAFALQUE 425 perfection, why for the rest of his life he chose to keep it hidden away. Jung himself had always been immensely sensitive to how much, or little, he could openly say about prophetic matters. People since then no longer have any need for such sensitivity, though, because they throw everything to do with prophecy straight out of the window.°* The great reluctance expressed by von Franz to speak out about his final, prophetic visions fits only too well into a vastly larger picture. Even so, there is something very particular about them; very special. And that has to do with the way Jung's last vision, about the end of humanity, took place "when he was right dying": precisely at the point of his death. All the staking of claims to his inheritance and legacy, the excitement about carrying his work forward into the future, has completely obscured and covered over one crucial consideration which would be obvious to anyone with a genuine understanding of history; a true respect for the past. This is the fact that for thousands of years western culture has valued the visions and words of the dying at the moment of their death even more than anything they ever happened to see, or say, while alive. Malista anthropoi chrésméidousin, hotan mellésin apothaneisthat. "People prophesy especially", as Socrates is supposed to have said, "just before they die." This tradition of divinare morientes -- of the dying being able to see as prophets, speak as prophets, during their crucial last moments alive -- has been massively important throughout western literature as well as inside the physical texture of people's lives.°' And beyond this vital element of prophecy at the moment of leaving the body, of being given the insight that's needed to see accurately the future lying ahead, other more humanistic 426 PART FOUR elements also came into play in a way that would define the essential aspects of ars vivendi -- or the art of living -- and ars moriendi -- or the art of dying -- during the centuries before Jung's own time. One was the understanding that, at the moment of death, the masks are finally stripped away. All the faking and posturing and hiding, all the fancy ambiguities and double-talk, give way to naked honesty. "There is no more pretending", as Montaigne said in the sixteenth century: you just show what's "at the bottom of the pot". And another had to do with the attitudes and responsive- ness of the living. There was a perfectly intuitive understanding that the real function of family members is to stand by in full sensitivity and support during this critical moment of transition because what the dying person experiences and sees and tries to convey at the ora mortis, the hour of death, is like a condensed biography -- a summary of the whole life just lived. But even more critically urgent in certain circles was the importance of a close and trusted friend being present, as "the essential intermediary between a dying speaker and the public', to record the person's final words and gestures; faithfully to preserve each single detail of them; and, above all, to transmit them fully and selflessly to the people at large for the sake of generations to come." Of course, thanks to the unrelenting rationalism of the twentieth century, when it was Jung's turn to die in the summer of 1961 all these ancient and humanistic traditions were already in tatters. At the same time, though, not only did he happen to be intimately familiar with the details of this centuries-old wisdom about how to live: how to die. In fact that was the very least of it, because ever since the time of the work he was forced to do on the Red book -- which would be little more than his formal invitation into the world CATAFALQUE 427 of the dead -- he had found himself becoming an integral part of those traditions. For the rest of his life, as the rest of his life, he would be inwardly living them; dying them. And considering not only his profound respect for our history as westerners, but above all the uniquely high value he ascribed to prophetic visions as well as dreams, the very least one could have done would have been to restore his final terrifying visions to their rightful place in his life. But for the sake of propriety, and the usual fakery of trying to continue with business as normal, they have been completely suffocated instead. Rather than seeing this as a positive sign of progress and evolution for Jung's psychology, though, it would be far more accurate to see it as a sign of radical regression to an infantile state; as showing how immature the psychology still is of those who, as Jung contemptuously used to comment, "mouth my name" without any idea of "what it's all about". After all, he did repeatedly insist that the ultimate goal of his psychology -- just like the ultimate purpose of ancient philoso- phy -- is simply to prepare for the moment of death. But as he also explained to someone close to him, only a couple of years before he died: my psychology, to be sure, like any real psychology is purely a preparation for an end. Or to be more precise, it can be considered a preparation for the end. And he makes it quite clear, here as well as elsewhere, that he is not only referring to the end of an individual. He is referring to the end of our culture. Then he adds that there is only one real question left, which is the question of what precisely we are going to end up killing. And the choice for him was very straightforward. Either we all manage to kill our collectively "infantile psychology" by going through the painful process of growing up -- or we just kill ourselves." 428 PART FOUR Two years on, it was exactly the same story for Jung: simply a later chapter. And now we, too, are left with a choice. Either we hide the evidence of his life and death away so we can shuffle on with our own, because we don't understand what's needed. Or we do the right thing and look at the bottom of our pot. It was one night just at the start of 2011. I had no idea, at the time, of Jung's final vision fifty years earlier about the final fifty years of humanity. My wife and I were living up in the mountains of North Carolina and, halfway through that night, it was like a call I could no longer resist. I knew I had to sink deep down inside myself to see what's happening in my life; with my work; in the world. And then there is the shock of being shown, all of a sudden, what already has happened -- not just in my own little life, my private world. In the intense quiet which sometimes comes at the middle of the night I see that everything has stopped. But the stillness is full of terror because this isn't the stillness of nature resting for the night. This is the stillness at the end of a civilization. Quite literally, our western world has come to an end. When I looked more closely I could see how each culture has a momentum, just like the spiral movements described by Empedocles that lie behind any cosmic cycle. In a cycle every- thing spins in one direction -- before eventually coming to a stop. For an indefinable moment, neither inside nor outside of time, there is the stillness between two contrary motions. Then everything begins rotating in the opposite direction. And this is 430 PART FOUR the point we've come to: that torn poise of utter stillness at the end of one movement, one cycle, one directional thrust, before everything turns into reverse." As it is in the cosmos, so it is in any animal or human but also in the life of a civilization. And this civilization has come to an end. The movement has stopped. The energy behind its momentum is over; spent. Anyone sensitive enough to the depths can recognize this instinctively, physically, deep inside. But to feel it needs a certain courage because the stillness at the end is horrifying. It's not the beauty of nature's silence with the birds and animals tucked up, asleep, and the sun's loudness concealed for a while from the earth. This is another silence. It's the silence of everything you know coming to an end, just like that. But of course to realize this consciously would be too big a shock. And so what happens is that -- like a wheel or a disk still spinning even after it's been switched off -- people keep on rushing around because they don't want to realize anything has stopped. Just the same as those cartoon characters who race out into the void and don't notice they are right above the abyss, we go on trying to think everything is normal. For a few unreal moments we are running above empty space although there is nothing any more, no foundation or support, to hold or take us forward. We are simply being carried by the ghostlike residue of that original movement which is nothing more, now, than the momentum of our own unconscious habits. But even that will fizzle out: come to a stop until everything drops, which is when there is chaos. And this is the reason why all the familiar structures around us are having to crash and collapse. It's not because of corruption, or because the wrong people got into power, or to make way for something fairer and stronger and better that we can build. CATAFALQUE 431 It's because the energy needed to prop up our collective existence is exhausted -- and there is the undertow, ever so imperceptible, of the opposite movement stirring. The trouble is, though, that this new direction has nothing to do with anything our minds are familiar with. It's nothing those minds of ours can be a part of, because it's completely contrary to whatever they think they know. It's so new we can only even possibly start to intuit it by going deep into the nothingness inside ourselves where we become free from every pattern of thinking, every single thought form, any memory of the way things have been along with any expectation or fantasy or noble ideal or hope of how things should be -- because that's all still the momentum of the old. First comes the silent call to die totally into the stillness, so as to be able to become a part of what the new movement will be. First one has to experience the ending, not only of oneself but of a whole civilization: has to realize that it's all already finished. And then it becomes clear that, although everyone can appear not to be aware of how nothing is real any more, secretly most people already are. They are just too confused, or afraid, to say anything about what they sense inside themselves. It's only a process of nature: nothing to be scared of. Our own culture, like any other culture in the past or future, is simply a natural organism -- just as the word, itself, implies. And every organism happens to be finite, which means it dies. The big problem is that, humanly, this is almost impossible to accept. It's so hard not to want to hide our deepest intuitions away somewhere inside a drawer; so undignified to go ahead and hide them. But certainly sentimentality isn't going to help. Neither, for that matter, is hope. 432 PART FOUR Neither is the technology that brought us here, because we lost the keys to its sacred dimension long ago. Consciously we just don't have the wisdom or knowledge needed, although with our tricks and toys we do like to fool ourselves that we do. We have forgotten what it means truly to miss that wisdom: to howl for its loss. And right to the edge of the precipice we go on trying to deceive ourselves it will all work out just fine. Five months before March 2011, which is when the earthquake and tsunami struck Fukushima, I was taken high above the earth in a dream and allowed to look down over the north-east coast of Japan. There, I was told, is where a major disaster will happen. Populations will be forced to leave. But the entire world is going to be affected -- and that will only be the first in a whole string of catastrophes. I was even shown the dimple on the cheek of the very femi- nine being, serious but with the faintest trace of a smile around her face, who had been empowered to carry the effects of the catastrophe over sea and land on the winds. And I understood that this will be the work of the mythological Harpies brought back to life all over again: the female spirits, part human and part bird, who are responsible for snatching away half the food of their blinded victims and making whatever they leave behind inedible by taking care to shit on it. Their most famous victim in myth was a prophet who had given the gods' secrets away. But, strange as it might sound, we have all become prophets now with our pride in predicting the little things as well as the big -- and in thinking we can take the gods' secrets for free. In our modern, rational age we despise 434 PART FOUR the idea of prophecy or prophesying not because we have gone beyond it. We hate it because we long to be even better prophets than the prophets once were, by cutting out any dependence on the divine. It's not that we look down on them because we dislike what they did but because we crave to have their divine powers for ourselves. This is the wanting that makes us so special; so extraordinary; and will bring us down. As for the reality of prophecy: it's so simple and ordinary, nothing special at all. As this example of Fukushima shows, it's still quite possible to see things clearly in advance. And that's because everything first appears inside us, then takes months or even much longer to work its way out. Considering that fifty years on from Jung's final prophecy in 1961 brings us to 2011, you could say he was wrong about the end of humanity. After all, no pictures of us being destroyed were ever shown on the television. But that's not how these things are measured -- because the real endings, the ones that matter, don't happen outside. They take place far down inside us, where the living and the dead rub shoulders and pass each other on their way to work. When my wife and I| were still living in New Mexico I often had to fly to California. And one afternoon, returning to Albuquerque, the flight crew started their usual announcement over the speaker system as we were preparing for our descent. Everything was just the same as normal except that, this time, it was totally different. Although the woman's voice churned out the standard statements she had made hundreds of times before, there was something in her tone that sank straight into my being. And I realized that when a culture forces a human to act so automatically, talk so robotically, the humanity inside the person is lost -- lost first in that individual, then in the world. CATAFALQUE 435 But what's lost, this way, is never recovered; it's gone for good. It's exactly the same with the fancy invention of phone menus that came from America. First, it was enough to press this button or that. After a while, pressing a button was no longer acceptable and now you had to start talking into the phone. There is one minor problem, though: a little catch. Every traditional culture or society in the world has known that the power of the spoken word is sacred. Humans were given the tools of language or speech by the divine so that they could communicate, and honour, the divine. And when we end up using that sacred gift of voice to talk to machines, then we have crossed an uncrossable line. Everything can seem to go on working and functioning, for a while. But our role in existence has been hollowed out; our human purpose on this planet turned completely upside down. There are divine laws we are no longer aware of that are non- negotiable, because they are there for a reason. And when certain violations progress from accidental, to repeated, to deliberate, there are consequences from which there is no coming back. Humanity isn't something we have a right to. It's the finest possible commodity that has to be cultivated, treasured, pro- tected: otherwise it just slips away through our fingers and, before we even know what happened, is gone. The haunting question is who is left to know it -- because it needs humanity to tell the difference between humanity and the lack of it. This is such a delicate matter that we can glimpse it only to lose sight of it in the next moment; drift close to it, only to slip away.° Needless to say, we can recite from memory and parrot and mimic as much as we want. But we don't prove we are human by patting ourselves down and reassuring each other we have two 436 PART FOUR arms and legs and a head. This just proves we are animals in human bodies, which is easy enough to confirm if we honestly are ready to look. And once that germ of humanity is gone, nobody will ever be the wiser. At the end of January 2012, I was staying with friends in the south of Switzerland. One afternoon I went up to my room at the top of the house and lay down to incubate in the old way -- the ancient western method of meditation used for entering into the depths inside oneself. And almost straight away I came to the strangest place | had ever been before. There 1 was brought face to face with the reality of this present age, not as it's seen from our world of the living but as it's viewed from the world of the dead. What I was shown was like a huge picture book, but continuous and without any pages. It contained all the smallest details of each aeon and stage in life on earth, including the great periods of human civilization: explained in images how they actually function, are made possible, what their real purpose is from the perspective of eternity. At the far left of every period was a vertical line separating it from the age before, with another at the far right marking it off from the age to come. Stretching out from the line on the left was something that looked like half of a horizontal belt or band, with the other half reaching towards it from the line on the right. And the aim of each age is to link the half of the 438 PART FOUR belt on the left to the half on the right to create a single chain connecting its point of origin to its point of destiny. This is the continuous band, running from the distant past into the distant future, that humanity is asked and expected to travel together with the rest of life on earth. But the one section I was being encouraged to see, inside that pageless book, is the section corresponding to this period we now are in. And what was most extraordinary about it, when I looked, was that we are not at the end of an age at all. On the contrary, we are right in the middle of it -- and totally lost. A voice coming from beside me explained that because of our collective "forgetfulness and laziness" we abandoned any path, which means we've broken the essential link between our future and our past. We are so hopelessly disoriented, so sure when there is nothing to be sure of and so uncertain where certainty is the one thing needed, that we can no longer tell left from right or down from up. And I started to understand the exquisite logic of what I was being shown: the quintessentially underworld logic which, as always, is so much more rigorous than the ridiculous attempts we make at pretending to be reasonable. We like to think of each age as a single unit, with its beginning and end. But the dead are far more cunning than us, and strap the second half of what we call an age to the first half of the next so they can see exactly what's happening -- what really works. It's the transitions between ages, as Jung understood so well, that truly matter; have such a central importance. And if we can carry the essence of one age, unbroken, into the beginning of another we have achieved something genuinely worth recording. The trouble is that in our case nothing is being carried forward. Halfway through this period of life on earth which was meant to count for something in the eyes of eternity we lost CATA FALQUE 439 our bearings and, thanks to the laziness of our forgetfulness, let the crucial link between past and future fly apart. The result is that we are left wandering and spinning in a void, searching for remedies perfectly designed to make the situation worse, incapable of getting back on track. The faster we spin, the more desperate the solutions; and instead of realizing that we are lost at some insignificant point out in the middle of nowhere, we prefer to dream about some grandly critical climax. To compensate for the overwhelming sense of confusion and utter uselessness that keeps rising inside, we conjure up illusions of some global awakening even while steadily falling further asleep -- try to console ourselves with fantasies about being at the cusp of something magnificent, about edging to the threshold of a glorious renaissance, to the dawn of a great rebirth. The reality is, though, that now isn't the time for giving birth to anything truly new. Instead, it's just a question of how little or much of the initial impulse that originally gave rise to our culture we are able to carry through the coming maelstrom. And to be quite clear: if that forgotten sacred impulse at the root of our world is simply allowed to fizzle out because of our laziness, this doesn't mean our present age will finish early so as to make way for something new. It will just drag on into eternity for its allocated time -- a blank, an empty nothingness that counts for nothing. And whether that happens to be a time of brute barbarism or technological annihilation or technological perfection doesn't matter at all, because in terms of humanity there will be nothing doing. From the point of view of the dead, that will be the futile and inglorious ending of our current aeon. From the point of view of the living, it will be the first few centuries of what we prefer to think of as a new age: completely fallow, static, dead. And as I was coming close to writing this, it was quite a shock to 440 PART FOUR find how Joachim of Fiore used to describe the first six hundred years or so of every new period or age. He mentioned being shown how "each age must be preceded by a period of incubation": a time of enormous outer changes and disturbances during which any remaining seeds of humanity are quietly left to incubate, latent, inactive, fallow." If we had only learned what it means to beat our way back all the way past our inhumanity to our primordial nature, we could have discovered how to move straight through the eye of the storm. It would have been possible with the tiny light of our individual awareness to incubate in the depths of the darkness during the far greater incubation of the world -- and consciously nurture those seeds for the future. But that's not going to happen this time, at least hardly at all, because we lost the link to our primordial past. Halfway through the night, in the middle of March 2013, I woke abruptly with a dream. The dream was as simple as it was insistent -- one single word being displayed in front of me, spelled out for me with perfect clarity. It was a word that I somehow knew, in my sleep, I had never known the meaning of or even heard of in my waking life: Catafalque. When I did wake up, I was still repeating the word time and time again so I wouldn't forget. I was almost certain it must just be an imagined invention of my subconscious mind that doesn't actually exist. But as soon as I managed to look it up in a dictionary I found to my great surprise that, down to the very last letter, it does. And whether or not I, personally, had come across the word already at some forgotten point in my daily life couldn't have mattered less -- because the unexpected experience of a word or expression presenting itself so forcefully is always, if you watch the process, nothing short of magic. It didn't take a long time of reading the dictionary definitions before the meaning of the dream started sinking in. I took and told it to a very holy old man who always welcomes me ever so politely when I visit him at his tiny home, the walls all covered 442 PART FOUR with paintings, on the rocks beside the sea. And he explained to me not only that, but also how, I need to write this book. "Catafalque" comes from an old Italian word used to describe the decorated, elegantly embroidered, wooden structure that would be erected as the base on which a famous or important person's coffin could be placed. It stood there as a basic framework, supporting whoever had died, in the middle of all the funeral ceremonies; the processions; the paying of final respects. And that, in a word, is the purpose of my work: to provide a catafalque for our western world. If such a statement sounds strange to you, it's because you don't understand that this world of ours is already dead. It existed for a while, did the best it could, but is nothing more than a lifeless remnant of what it was meant to be. And while the optimistic consciousness of our mass media, our education system, our collective hysteria keeps trying to practise some weird necrophilia on the body of our culture there is something else completely different that needs to be done. The correct attitude right now is to come together to raise a ritual lament. You could call this the most basic hygiene, as well as sanity. We need to grieve; need to celebrate the ending before a clean new beginning can ever take place. As indigenous people instinctively know, but we've forgotten in our cold-heartedness, when the time comes for weeping one has to weep. And this is the moment for marking, and honouring, the passing of our culture. It's the time to tie up the loose ends and tidy up; finish off with nobility and dignity; clear everything away and put one's house in order. There is no need now for optimism or hope. On the contrary, we have entered a place where every hope has to be abandoned and to keep on indulging in optimism is a shameless dereliction of our duty. The one thing needed is the exact opposite of our CATAFALQUE 443 manufactured hoping, which is the divine reality of faith -- because faith is the most extraordinary flower, as alive and intelligent as it's beautiful, which you can meet out on the street in the dark or alone back home if your vision isn't stunted by hope. As for optimism, it's just as devastating as pessimism in preventing us from seeing the realities everywhere around us. Of course even to talk about the possibility of some magical middle ground, hidden between hope and despair, is almost pointless when confronted with the collective pressure to rush off the cliff out of sheer expectant greed for more and more. And as for the foolishness of claiming everything is over: nothing could sound as rationally or blatantly absurd. But this is simply the impossible nature of the situation we are faced with. As Jung once noted, in pointing to the realities of the soul "I am refuted all along the line, just like someone prophesying a thunderstorm when there isn't a single cloud in the sky." There is nothing that could seem more crazy. "The truth is, though, that questions of the soul always lie below the horizon of consciousness. And in addressing this problem of the soul we are talking about things right at the boundary of what's visible; about the most intimate and fragile things; about flowers that open only in the night." There are times, as he said, when you don't go on trying to fix or solve -- when, not just with a difficult patient but with a whole age, you acknowledge there is nothing left to be done. Then, as great Sufis and alchemists have realized, even to pray is to interfere: is an act of disrespect. Naturally that doesn't mean you don't submit to accepting with humility, with a genuine sense of ethics and responsibility, whatever duties are imposed on you by life. But it's only what Jung 444 PART FOUR called the "small and fragmentary people" who always need to occupy themselves with doing something, improving something. And that could even include psychologists, so busy with their bag of tricks they completely miss the crucial atmosphere or essential spirit out of which every trick emerges and into which it will also disappear. All the inner work of exploration and integration is nothing but the first very tentative, preliminary steps: little more than the crudest of ruses for distracting people long enough from their superficial selves that perhaps, for a moment or two and even three, they'll really start facing their depths. But the ultimate purpose, as he made very clear, is not to integrate. It's to die -- consciously leave ourselves behind, shed absolutely everything, strip every trace of identification or attachment away. As for the existence of some future: to me it was quite revealing, after years of telling people we belong here in the present and should leave the future alone because it belongs to the people of the future, to open the Red book when it came out and find Jung saying the same thing in just the same words. "The future should be left to those who belong to the future." And as he paradoxically adds, this is "the great way -- the way of what is to come'. Just as there have to be people who consciously help to bring a culture into being, there have to be those who consciously help to bring it to an end. And this is the moment for the catafalque, when we need to be brave enough to focus on just what's needed because the catafalque is also for us. It's the time for learning our primordial or original instructions, as Native Americans have referred to them for centuries, all over again; the time to turn around and face our ancestors, to dance for the dead. CATAFALQUE 445 As for this book: you are welcome to take it seriously if that will help you not to take yourself seriously. But the worst thing would be to take it seriously only for it to trouble you or weigh you down. Its style is likely to feel strangely unfamiliar -- because this is the ancient style we've forgotten, along with the modern. It's the choiceless rhythm of the winds and rain. I would never want you to know even a thousandth of what its writing involved. And you can try your best to criticize it if you are an expert at judging how the weather should be assessed. The enormous notes are a joke, grotesque monuments to a culture that abandoned itself. But if you ever care to dip into them, you might find some of them are like a miniature book offering an opening to another world. As for the point behind it all: that's very simple. The point is to leave us stripped of everything -- even of Jung who so badly needs to be set free, even of this book. It's only by shedding everything, including ourselves, that we sow the seeds of the future. www.peterkingsley.org CATAFALQUE BY PETER KINGSLEY CARL JUNG AND THE END OF HUMANITY VOLUME 2 First published in 2018 by Catafalque Press, London www.catafalquepress.com contact@catafalquepress.com ISBN 978-1-9996384-0-5 (two-volume set) Copyright © 2018 Peter Kingsley All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, or stored in any database or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Publisher. Printed by Lightning Source Book design by Leslie Bartlett www. lesliebartlett.com British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library FIVE SIX SEVEN CONTENTS VOLUME 2 ABBREVIATIONS NOTES Notes to Part One Notes to Part Two Notes to Part Three Notes to Part Four INDEX ABBREVI- ATIONS ACU AE Aion AJ AN APMM ARV ABBREVIATIONS C.G. Jung, Archetypes and the collective unconscious (Collected works, vol. 9/1; 2TM4 ed., London 1968) H. Corbin, Larchange empourpré (Paris 1976) C.G. Jung, Aion (Collected works, vol. 9/I]; London 1959} H. Corbin, Autour de Jung, ed. M. Cazenave and D. Proulx (Paris 2014) C.G. Jung's unpublished alchemy notebooks (1935-1953), held by the Foundation of the Works of C.G. Jung in Zurich P. Kingsley, Ancient philosophy, mystery and magic (Oxford 1995) H. Corbin, Avicenne et le récit visionnaire (3 vols. Tehran 1952-54) AS AWA BB CBA CD CS CT DA DP Ell PART FIVE C.G. Jung, Alchemical studies (Collected works, vol. 13; London 1967) H. Corbin, Alone with the alone (Princeton 1998); originally published, without the preface by Harold Bloom, as Creative imagination in the Sitifism of Ibn Arabi (Princeton 1969) CG. Jung, The black books The archive of Cary Baynes (born Cary Fink and, from 1910 until 1927, called Cary de Angulo), held in the Wellcome Library, London C.G. Jung, Children's dreams, ed. L. Jung and M. Meyer -- Grass (Princeton 2008) Esther Harding's unpublished notes on the "Cornwall seminar" given by Jung at Polzeath in July 1923 (Beinecke Library, Yale University) CG. Jung, Civilization in transition (Collected works, vol. 10; 2° ed., London 1970) C.G. Jung, Dream analysis, ed. W. McGuire (London 1984) C.G. Jung, The development of personality (Collected works, vol. 17; 3% ed., London 1970) H. Corbin, En Islam iranien (4 vols., Paris 1971-72) ABBREVIATIONS EJ Empedocles ENM ETG FC FJ FP fr./frs. FR] Eranos -- Jahrbucher cited according to the fragment (fr.) numbers in H. Diels, Poetarum philosophorum fragmenta (Berlin 1901) 74-168 and L. Gemelli Marciano, Die Vorsokratiker ii (2TM ed., Berlin 2013) 138- P, Kingsley, "Empedocles for the new millennium", Ancient philosophy 22 (2002) 333 -- C.G. Jung, Erinnerungen, Traume, Gedanken, ed. A. Jaffé (Zurich 1962) The Fonds Henry et Stella Corbin, held in the Ecole pratique des hautes études, Paris Sigmund Freud / C.G. Jung, Briefwechsel, ed. W. McGuire and W. Sauerlander (Frankfurt 1974) C.G. Jung, Freud and psychoanalysis (Collected works, vol. 4; 2"¢ ed., London 1970) fragment(s) Remembering Jung, two conversations with Marie -- Louise von Franz during March 1977 and September 1979, produced by George Wagner and directed by Suzanne Wagner (3 DVDs, C.G. Jung Institute of Los Angeles, Los Angeles 1991) HC A IDPW TJs T]P JAP JB JBA JH J] JTTP T]W PART FIVE Henry Corbin, ed. C. Jambet (L'Herne, vol. 39; Paris 1981) Carl Gustav Jung, ed. M. Cazenave (L'Herne, vol. 46; Paris 1984) P. Kingsley, In the dark places of wisdom (Inverness, CA 1999) International journal of Jungian studies C.G. Jung, Introduction to Jungian psychology, ed. W. McGuire and S. Shamdasani (Princeton 2012) Journal of analytical psychology C.G., Jung, Briefe, ed. A. Jaffé and G. Adler (3 vols., Olten 1972-73) C.G. Jung biographical archive, Countway Library of Medicine, Boston Jung history Jung journal Journal of Jungian theory and practice C.G. Jung, Emma Jung and Toni Wolff, ed. F. Jensen (San Francisco 1982) ABBREVIATIONS JK JL JM JN JP JPPF JS JSB JV The Jung-Kirsch letters, ed. A.C. Lammers (24 ed., Abingdon 2016) C.G. Jung, Letters, ed. G. Adler and A. Jaffé (2 vols., London 1973-76) S. Shamdasani, Jung and the making of modern psychology (Cambridge 2003) C.G. Jung und Erich Neumann: Die Briefe 1933- 1959, ed. M. Liebscher (Ostfildern 2015) The Jaffé Protocols, being Aniela Jaffé's initial transcript of the biographical material she noted down in shorthand during her interviews with Carl Jung between September 1956 and October 1958 (C.G. Jung Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington D.C.) Jahrbuch fur psychoanalytische und psycho- pathologische Forschungen C.G. Jung speaking, ed. W. McGuire and R.F-C. Hull (Princeton 1977) S. Shamdasani, Jung stripped bare by his biographers, even (London 2005) C.G. Jung, Visions, ed. C. Douglas (2 vols., Princeton 1997) JW JWCI MC MDR MDRC MH NL PART FIVE The Jung -- White letters, ed. A.C. Lammers and A. Cunningham (Hove 2007) Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes James Kirsch, "C.G. Jung's individuation as shown especially in Answer to Job", unpublished transcript of a lecture given in the 1980s and cited with the permission of Thomas Kirsch C.G. Jung, The psychology of kundalini yoga, ed. S. Shamdasani (Princeton 1996) C.G. Jung, Mysterium coniunctionis (Collected works, vol. 14; 2°¢ ed., London 1970) C.G. Jung, Memories, dreams, reflections, ed. A. Jafté (London 1963/New York 1973) The original English-language typescript for Memories, dreams, reflections, held at the Countway Library of Medicine in Boston Matter of heart: a documentary film directed, produced and written by Mark Whitney, Michael Whitney and Suzanne Wagner (C.G. Jung Institute of Los Angeles, Los Angeles 1983) G.F. Nameche and R.D. Laing, Jung and persons: a study in genius and madness (University of Glasgow special collections, MS Laing A3); ABBREVIATIONS NZ OMM PA Parmenides PB PIB PP for the origins and composition of this unpublished typescript see Nameche, On the origins of this book (ibid., MS Laing A6) C.G. Jung, Nietzsche's 'Zarathustra', ed. J.L. Jarrett (2 vols., Princeton 1988) Shihab al-Din Yahya al-Suhrawardi, Opera metaphysica et mystica, ed. H. Corbin (i, Istanbul 1945; ii, Tehran 1952) C.G. Jung, Psychology and alchemy (Collected works, vol. 12; 2"4 ed., London 1968) cited according to the fragment (fr.) numbers in H. Diels, Poetarum philosophorum fragmenta (Berlin 1901) 48-73 and L. Gemelli Marciano, Die Vorsokratiker ii (2TM4 ed., Berlin 2013) 6-95 W. Pauli, Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel mit Bohr, Einstein, Heisenberg u.a., ed. K. von Meyenn (Berlin 1979-2005) From Poimandres to Jacob Boehme, ed. R. van den Broek and C. van Heertum (Amsterdam 2000). 17-40 = P. Kingsley, "An introduction to the Hermetica", 41-76 = Kingsley, "Poimandres: the etymology of the name and the origins of the Hermetica" Psychological perspectives PPT PR PSIE PT QPT RBu Reality SB PART FIVE C.G. Jung, The practice of psychotherapy (Collected works, vol. 16; 2°4 ed., London 1966) C.G. Jung, Psychology and religion (Collected works, vol. 11; 274 ed., London 1969) L. Gemelli Marciano, Parmenide: suoni, immagini, esperienza (Sankt Augustin 2013) C.G. Jung, Psychological types (Collected works, vol. 6; London 1971) The question of psychological types: the correspon- dence of C.G. Jung and Hans Schmid-Guisan, ed. J. Beebe and E. Falzeder (Princeton 2013) CG. Jung, The red book, ed. S. Shamdasani (New York 2009); in cases where my English translation differs from the published one, | refer to Jung's original text according to the German edition (RBu) or the folio and page numbers of his illuminated manuscript C.G. Jung, Das Rote Buch, ed. S. Shamdasani (Diisseldorf 2009} P. Kingsley, Reality (Inverness, CA 2003) H. Corbin, Spiritual body and celestial earth (2TM ed., Princeton 1989) ABBREVIATIONS SD SFJI SL SM SNZ SSO ST SW TE C.G. Jung, The structure and dynamics of the psyche (Collected works, vol. 8; 2"¢ ed., London 1972) San Francisco Jung Institute library journal C.G. Jung, The symbolic life (Collected works, vol. 18; 2"¢ ed., Princeton 1980) C.G. Jung, The spirit in man, art and literature (Collected works, vol. 15; London 1966) Jung's seminar on Nietzsche's 'Zarathustra', ed. and abridged by J.L. Jarrett (Princeton 1998) H. Corbin, Sohravardi: Le livre de la sagesse orientale (Lagrasse 1986) C.G. Jung, Symbols of transformation (Collected works, vol. 5; 24 ed., London 1967) P. Kingsley, A story waiting to pierce you (Inverness, CA 2010) C.G. Jung, Two essays on analytical psychology (Collected works, vol. 7; 24 ed., London 1966) C.G. Jung, The Zofingia lectures (Collected works, supplementary volume A; London 1983) NOTES TO PART ONE 1 The Eranos gatherings have recently become a subject of intense interest for academics. See e.g. R. Bernardini, Jung a Eranos (Milan 2011) and in Spring 92 (2015) 1-26, H.T. Hakl, Eranos (Sheffield 2013), and that strange masterpiece of modern prejudice and pseudo-learning -- Religion after religion by S.M. Wasserstrom (Princeton 1999) -- together with Maria Subtelny's patient response, Iranian studies 36 (2003) 91-101. 2 "C' était pour moi une joie extraordinaire et une expérience pas seulement des plus rares, mais plutét unique, d'étre compris complétement. Je suis accoutumé de vivre dans un vacuum intellectuel plus ou moins complet ...": letter from Jung to Corbin dated 4 May 1953 (FC). For the French original see HC 328 = AJ 156; for an English translation, JZ ii 115. This letter is ignored by Tom Cheetham, who wastes his time listing all the theoretical points on which Jung and Corbin would and should have disagreed while -- as a true follower of James Hillman -- missing what is most essential (Green man, earth angel, Albany 2005, 47-54; After prophecy, New Orleans 2007, 103-12; All the world an icon, Berkeley 2012). 466 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL 5 «',. cette atmosphére de liberté spirituelle absolue, ot chacun sexprime sans souci d'aucun dogme officiel et en ne s'efforcant qu'a étre soi-méme, 4 étre vrai": Revue de culture européenne 5 (1953) 12. Compare also Corbin's comments, recorded 25 years later just before he died, on the lasting legacy of Eranos: "... une liberté spirituelle intégrale. Chacun découvrait peu 4 peu et laissait parler le tréfonds de lui-méme. ... Cet entrainement a étre franchement et intégralement soi-méme devient une habitude que l'on ne perd plus ..." (HC 48). 'See e.g. his Avicenna and the visionary recital (London 1960) 27-32 (ARV ii 31-7). When Jung found himself being drawn to say that the only truth there can be for you is your truth (RB 231 n.27), he was warning against the psychological dangers of trying to imitate someone else's truth (ibid. 231b) -- which ironically is where the superficial attempt to live one's own truth always tends to end up -- and, similarly, was speaking out of a depth of experience far removed from the level of the conscious personality. On the weighty implications for Jung of living "my truth", and the essential requirement that it embrace the sacred reality of the timeless as well as all the dramas of time, see the prologue to Memories, dreams, reflections (MDR 17/3) with P. Bishop's comments, Carl Jung (London 2014) 10-13. 5 On the undesirability and painfulness of truth see e.g. Empedocles fr. 114.1-3 Diels = fr. 159 Gemelli Marciano; Reality 313. T.S. Eliot, with his "human kind / Cannot bear very much reality" (Burnt Norton I), speaks as a perfect student of the Greeks. Truth and remembering "from the beginning" (ex archés): cf. especially J. -- P. Vernant, Journal de psychologie NOTES TO PAGES 9-I5 467 normale et pathologique 56 (1959) 6-7 with M. Detienne, Les maitres de vérité dans la Gréce archaique (Paris 1967) 47; also G. Nagy, Homeric questions (Austin 1996) 122-6. ® It was some time after writing this that for the first time | came across these words by Henry Corbin: "... The past must be 'put in the present' ... The genuine transcending the past can only be 'putting it in the present' ... And I believe it can be said that the entire work of Eranos is, in this sense, a putting in the present ..." (Man and time, ed. J. Campbell, London 1958, XVii). 7 See e.g. M. Lings, Mubammad (London 1983) 105-6. § Significantly, Jung himself had little patience with those who made an issue of doubting whether the so-called "primitive medicine man" could in any true psychological sense be called conscious or individuated. ""Well, I don't know about that', he said. "They may not be conscious but they hear the inner voice, they act on it, they do not go against it -- that is what counts" (JS 211). > On Hitler's heartfelt gratitude to the British and especially Americans for inspiring his concept of concentration camps, and how he "often praised to his inner circle the efficiency of America's extermination -- by starvation and uneven combat -- of the red savages who could not be tamed by captivity', see J. Toland, Ado/f Hitler (Garden City, NY 1976) 702. For the venerable ancestry of the term "final solution" in the nineteenth-century history of the American military, and more specifically in the "final solution of the Indian problem" devised 468 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL by General William T. Sherman, see M. Fellman, Citizen Sherman (New York 1995) 260, 274, 452; J.A. Emison, Lincoln tuber alles (Gretna, LA 2009) 21, 67, 269-70. " Jung felt it important to emphasize almost exclusively the transcendent aspect of Anthropos, with the paradoxical result that he separated this archetypal "human" from ordinary human reality and experience. See especially Aion 198 §310 (Anthropos as "homo maximus", the king figure in direct contrast to "the anonymous individual of the populace"), 204 §318 (Anthropos as "empirically the most important archetype"), 231 figure A (distinguishing "Anthropos the higher Adam" from "Man the lower Adam"), 246 §388 (Anthropos as transcendent), 257 §406 ("the archetype of the Anthropos"); JZ ii 619 (questioning the ability of our self- conscious egos "to establish a conscious relationship with the Anthropos, i.e., the natural self. For, as you rightly point out, it would mean extending ego-consciousness into the realm of the transcendent"). This is all fair enough from a certain point of view; but it also is only one side of the coin. The other side is the perspective that Gnostics themselves were much more inclined to emphasize. According to that perspective, we ordinary humans are absolutely nothing outside of or without this archetypal reality. We are literally shapeless: unable not only to think or talk but even to stand or walk. See e.g. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 2.8.36.4 (Adam was created "in the name of Anthropos" when the primordial Anthropos "was established inside man") and 2.8.38.5 ("the Anthropos in the pleroma and the man 'according to his image' who received the archetype inside him") with F.-M.-M. Sagnard, La gnose valentinienne et le témoignage de saint Irénée (Paris 1947} 121-2 and 137-8; Extracts from Theodotus 50.1-51.1 (*... the NOTES TO PAGES 15-20 469 Man inside man ...", cf. R.P. Casey, The 'Excerpta ex Theodoto' of Clement of Alexandria, London 1934, 72-5, 143); Corpus hermeticum 1.12-17 (W. Barnstone and M. Meyer, The Gnostic bible, Boston 2003, 505-7); J. Lacarriére, The Gnostics (London 1977) 31-2; G. Quispel, Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica (Leiden 2008) 157-60. Ironically, on this particular issue Jung turns out to be more of a dualist than many of the so-called Gnostics -- although the relationship between them is usually described as being the exact opposite. ' TE 170-1 §§263- -- 5; J. Hopkins, Chung-Hwa Buddhist journal 21 (2008) 163, who wisely points out (ibid. 163-4) that even to believe in finding real solutions through politics or economics or social change is for Jung an unfailing sign of psychological inflation. Of course one would need to include most Jungians nowadays in the category of pious disciples. For a recent attempt at summarizing Jung's ideas about inflation see L. Schlamm in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2 ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 870-3. 2 Some time after writing this, 1 came across these words by Jung and Marie-Louise von Franz: "Old age is ... the gradual breaking down of the bodily machine, with which foolishness identifies ourselves. It is indeed a major effort -- the magnum opus in fact -- to escape in time from the narrowness of its embrace and to liberate our mind..." (Spring 1971, 135, cf. JL ii 580); "... at the end of life there is the big showdown. Have you frittered away your life in superficiality, or as Jung said about a woman once, 'Five minutes after her death, she'll not remember this life any more'. Or have you built something eternal ...?" (von Franz, PP 38, 1998, 16). 470 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL '5 This is one of the most constant, and central, themes in my book Reality: on the dangers of identifying with being a human see especially 347-495. Jung himself became familiar with the ancient linkage between danger and salvation especially through the work of Friedrich Holderlin, and his poem "Patmos": JPPF 4/1 (1912) 432-4 = Psychology of the unconscious (New York 1916) 445-7 (cf. ST 407-10 §§630-5), a passage that already connects Hélderlin's words "Where danger is, there lies salvation" with descent into the underworld; RB 300 n.205; PT 264 §446; CT 94 §195; JZ i 65 with n.5 and ii 193 with n.1; MDR 231/245; P. Bishop, The Dionysian se/f (Berlin 1995) 100-1; S. Shamdasani, C.G. Jung: a biography in books (New York 2012) 12-19, 215 n.19. " R.D. Laing in NZ 99-103. One recent example of the valiant Jungian protectors is Marvin Spiegelman with his insistence that, far from ever coming close to being schizophrenic or schizoid, "Jung, of course, was nothing of the sort; he braved immersing himself in the unconscious without succumbing to it, providing an example for many of us to do the same and find our own myth" (PP 49, 2006, 317). Recent attempts to squash "the familiar myth of Jung's madness" have been spearheaded by the editor of the Red book itself (JSB 72-5, 80, 95); but despite Sonu Shamdasani's unique access to original documents, he together with James Hillman both reveal themselves as ungrounded intellectuals in their lighthearted tiptoeing around the topic of madness and in Shamdasani's quaint denial that Jung was "at any point on the verge of tipping over" (Lament of the dead, New York 2013, 69-71). Compare also L.S. Owens, The Gnostic 3 (2010) 23-4, 30, who relies a little too heavily on Shamdasani; and T. Kawai, JAP 57 (2012) 380, who argues quite sincerely that Jung's most overwhelming experiences are far removed from schizophrenia NOTES TO PAGES 20-22 471 or psychosis because he happened to see things "very clearly" (not the wisest of diagnostic criteria) and because he had visionary rather than acoustic hallucinations. In fact the material preserved, thanks to the Red book, is just as much acoustic as visionary; and Jung himself remembered the entire process as an experience of hearing rather than seeing (JP 145, 170). '* For Jung grasping at furniture see S. Corbett, New York Times magazine (20 September 2009) 36 -- "'T often had to cling to the table', he recalled, 'so as not to fall apart'" -- together with the famous original Protocols on which Jung's Memories, dreams, reflections was based but that were held back from publication. There he describes in his own words how he often had to cling on desperately to the table in front of him to prevent himself from falling apart; and during those times experienced the most terrifying of moments, again and again having the constant feeling of being torn to shreds (JP 174, a passage badly rationalized and miscontextualized by S. Shamdasani, Spring 57, 1995, 125). For madness in the Red book see Jung's patently authentic musings at RB 238, 295-8; also the touchingly honest appraisals by V.W. Odajnyk, PP 53 (2010) 448-451 and M. Stein, JJ 4/4 (2010) 96 as well as Tina Keller's important eyewitness testimony that Jung "would now and then say how close he had felt to insanity" (W.K. Swan, JAP 51, 2006, 503 and The memoir of Tina Keller -- Jenny, New Orleans 2011, 27 §68). For the even earlier threats of "delusion and madness" that already confronted Jung years before he started work on the Red book, cf. A. Carotenuto, A secret symmetry (New York 1982) 190 with A.C. Elms, Uncovering lives (New York 1994) 67-8. In light of all this it would seem more than a little simplistic of Shamdasani to claim that Freud's repeated complaints during both 1912 and 1913 about 472 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL Jung being downright "crazy" are nothing but "psychoanalytic character assassination", carried out by Freud purely "as a way of discrediting" Jung's ideas (JSB 72). As for the relation between going mad and being afraid of going mad, which is a fear Jung experienced far more than once: Shamdasani again argues with the same simplistic reasonableness that there is a world of difference between the two because "in some sense, the fear of losing one's mind is a mark of one's sanity" (Lament of the dead, New York 2013, 70). What he fails to mention is Jung's own insistence, based on vastly more intimate as well as professional experience, that the transition from a fear of going mad into becoming mad is the slipperiest slope imaginable (JP 105-6). Also worth noting is Jung's inner conviction as a medical student that actually to go mad and experience madness for himself would be the best way of understanding, and helping, his patients (JP 252). "© Prior to publication of the Red book in 2009, one had to make do with Jung's warning that the book "will strike any superficial observer as sheer insanity. And this is exactly how it would have ended up if I had not been able to contain the overwhelming power of the original experience" (ETG 387; cf. RB 360). But even this comment was restricted to the German text of Memories, dreams, reflections: for the English version, Jung was only allowed to note in passing that the experience could theoretically "have driven me out of my wits" (MDR 181/189). On the saga of control and censorship surrounding the editing and eventual publication of his so- called autobiography, see A.C. Elms, Uncovering lives (New York 1994) 51-70; S. Shamdasani, Spring 57 (1995) 115-37 and JSB 22-45; also D. Bair's account, Jung (Boston 2003) 585-617. One of the main editors of Jung's collected works in English, Michael Fordham, has quaintly commented on NOTES TO PAGES 22-23 473 the madness ("far madder") contaminating original drafts of Memories, dreams, reflections before the text had been subjected to an appropriate editing process (Spring 57, 1995, 122-3: his use of the comparative form of the word "mad" is very eloquent). For the so-called "subtleties" silently introduced into the text by Fordham and his secretary see e.g. Bair 614, and contrast Jung's own desperate plea: "I want the book to look crazy!" (ibid. 613). " For madness and mastery of madness in early Greek philosophy see Reality 430-53, 479-80; for the continuation of the theme, RB 238 n.89, 321 n.313. One of the first people to recognize Jung -- "a walking asylum in himself, as well as its head physician', "a lunatic" who "went through everything an insane person goes through" -- as someone whose achievement is that he belonged "in a long line of 'shamans' who understood 'madness, and can heal it, because at periods they are half- mad themselves" was his own translator, R.F.C. Hull. See D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 292-3, 616-17. I trust I will be excused for laughing at the irony of modern-day scholars denouncing Hull as a "rationalist" (JSB 50; cf. N. Pilard, Jung and intuition, London 2015, 10, 117-18), or of prominent Jungian intellectuals dismissing him as an intellectual (JSB 51 n.136). On Jung's immense, lifelong regard for Hull and for the "aliveness" of his translations see Bair 583-4 together with the copies of their correspondence held at the Library of Congress (especially Jung's letter to Hull dated 27 December 1958). For shamanism and madness cf. e.g. M. Eliade, Myths, dreams and mysteries (New York 1961) 225; M. Hoppal, Shamans and traditions (Budapest 2007) 35; C. Pratt, An encyclopedia of shamanism (New York 2007) 4, 91, 116, 304, 436, 513; Reality 440. 474 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL '® Madness as the place where one encounters the sacred: see e.g. M. Stein, JJ 4/4 (2010) 96 on Jung's "transformed view of sickness and health. In the Red Book, he advocates embracing one's madness on the grounds that God is to be found there precisely. ... Just how deeply Jung carried out this project in his own case is amply demonstrated in the text. He gives very convincing impressions of pushing the mental envelope to the edge of insanity ...". Ordinary sanity as insanity: RB 238b (when talking about delusion and sickness, don't forget to include the insanely obsessive influence exerted on us by the spirit of our time which never stops forcing us to view only the most superficial surface of things), 298a (our everyday existence, even more so than all our noble philosophies and great words of wisdom, is not only illogical but totally mad). Of course this raises in passing the question of just what madness is and what possible usefulness the term can really have, aside from denoting states of unusual psychological intensity: cf. J. Custance, Wisdom, madness and folly (New York 1952) with C.G. Jung, SZ 349-52; J.W. Perry, The far side of madness (Englewood Cliffs 1974) and Trials of the visionary mind (Albany 1999); J. Hart, The way of madness (London 1997); P. Williams, Rethinking madness (San Rafael 2012). " For Corbin's very brief autobiographical comments, recorded just before he died, about the process of being taught "les vertus inestimables du Silence" directly by his inner teacher or sheikh see HC 46. For Empedocles' exquisitely beautiful comments on the nature of words see ENM 353, 399-404; Reality 518-33. To him, as well as other so-called Presocratic philosophers (for Parmenides note e.g. Theophrastus, On the senses 4 = Parmenides fr. 33.21 Gemelli Marciano = A.H. Coxon, The fragments of Parmenides, 2" ed., Las Vegas 2009, 142-3 §45), NOTES TO PAGES 23-27 475 absolutely everything in existence is full of consciousness and life -- even right down to the words we humans speak. Marie -- Louise von Franz has claimed that what makes the "alchemical myth" the only one worth living in the West, and the only one capable of reviving western civilization, is the alchemists' appreciation of matter as alive and conscious; their deep understanding of the feminine; and their willingness to face the problem of opposites (PP 38, 1998, 16). What von Franz fails to note is that all these understandings were quintessential aspects of the Presocratics' teachings (for the feminine see JDPW, for the opposites, Reality 29-30, 85-6, 212-13). No doubt this is because she held the faultlessly rationalistic and commendably evolutionary-minded view of Presocratic philosophy as nothing but a youthful and naive "kind of springtime of the spirit" (Puer aeternus, Santa Monica 1981, 101). 20 Jung was quite open in stating that his work was never intended to help people escape their suffering but was meant to give them the strength they needed to suffer consciously (cf. e.g. PPT 81 §185; also R. Aziz's comments, C.G. Jung's psychology of religion and synchronicity, Albany 1990, 42 -- 4 and M. Stein's, JJ 4/4, 2010, 96). Only in private, though, did he indicate just how far he took the practice of conscious suffering: see especially the letter published by G. Adler in PP 6 (1975) 12 ("... I consciously and intentionally made my life miserable, because I wanted God to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason more than God's secret intentions. ... Iry to apply seriously what I have told you, not that you might escape suffering -- nobody can escape it -- but that you may avoid the worst -- A/ind suffering"). On God, for Jung, as a directly experienced reality rather than a theological belief cf. e.g. J§ 251, 427-8; for his protest at the 476 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL utter superfluousness of mere belief in the presence of such experience, which thanks to its directness is naturally the greatest possible threat to believers and disbelievers alike, JZ i 141-2. *! On this absolutely fundamental idea of offering therapeia to the gods see e.g. Hesiod, Theogony 100 and Works and days 135; Homeric hymns 3.390 and 32.20; Pindar, Olympian odes 3.16, Herodotus, Histories 2.37; Euripides, Electra 744 and Ion 187. Therapeia and cognates were also used to describe the process of tending the sick or wounded, and this was the sense that helped Plato to shape our exclusive modern preoccupation with providing sherapeia for body and soul (Gorgias 464b, 513d; Laches 185e). It should perhaps be added that James Hillman's favourite etymologizing of the word therapeia (A blue fire, New York 1989, 73: "... the chair of the therapist is indeed a mighty throne ...") is complete self-serving fantasy. 22 See Plato, Euthyphro 12e -- 15c; F.-G. Herrmann in 4 companion to Greek religion, ed. D. Ogden (Oxford 2007) 390. One of the many dark ironies here is the way Aristotle -- along with a steady lineage of later thinkers -- managed to convince himself that, if anybody is to be capable of offering real therapeia to the gods, it can only be by becoming the purest of rationalists (Aristotle, Eudemian ethics 1249b13-23; M.L. McPherran, Journal of the history of philosophy 23, 1985, 287-309). This is nothing but a mockery of Socrates' sacred service to the god Apollo (Plato, Apology 23b -- c, 30a), which had led him to heal people of their illusions by destroying ail their proud concepts instead of helping to build them up (cf. PJB 29-31 and Reality 129, 150-6; for Apollo as both healer and destroyer see JDPW). But it also is a shining example NOTES TO PAGES 27-34 477 of how easily perceived realities can become distorted and even inverted within the space of just a single generation or two, although we soon will be encountering many more such examples in the case of Jung and his successors. 23 A. de Jong, Traditions of the Magi (Leiden 1997) 213-22, 399-400; H. Remus in Text and artifact in the religions of Mediterranean antiquity, ed. 8.G. Wilson and M. Desjardins (Waterloo 2000) 535-6. 24 Plutarch: On the ending of the oracles 411e -- -f. Porphyry: G. Wolff, Porphyrii de philosophia ex oraculis haurienda librorum reliquiae (Berlin 1856) 172 -- 4; K. Buresch, K/aros (Leipzig 1889) 41-2 n.8; B. Haussoullier, Etudes sur l'histoire de Milet et du Didymeion (Paris 1902) xxviii -- xxix §XLIII; J.J. O'Meara, Porphyry's 'Philosophy from oracles' in Augustine (Paris 1959) 70 n.1; J. Fontenrose, Didyma (Berkeley 1988) 219-222; Porphyrii philosophi fragmenta, ed. A. Smith (Stuttgart 1993) 370 §322F (the reductionist explanations of the second oracle by A. Busine, Paroles d Apollon, Leiden 2005, 350 are quite absurd); for the background cf. A.P. Johnson, Religion and identity in Porphyry of Tyre (Cambridge 2013) 172-8. On the famous "last oracle" see [.E. Gregory, Greek, Roman &F Byzantine studies 24 (1983) 355-66; to explain the oracle as prompted by an earthquake blocking a physical spring (M. Henry, Phoenix 39, 1985, 50-2; P. Athanassiadi, De/tion tés Christianikés Archaiologikés Etaireias 15, 1989-90, 277 and n.65) is to overlook the centuries-old prophetic language about the drying up of prophecy's flow. 25 For a modern example of this fashionably half-rational, half-intuitive view see J. Naydler, The future of the ancient 478 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL world (Rochester, VI 2009) 168-204. With unshakeable confidence Naydler declares, on the basis of so much growing interest among people today in divination and different forms of spirituality, that "for us the gods and spirits are returning" (179) -- evoking the new-age naivety which leads contemporary pagans from California to visit Delphi for a few days, interfere with the earth there by burying a few crystals, and then claim they have re-activated the ancient oracle. Re-activating sacred sites or gods or goddesses is the new craze: it seems never to occur to anyone that they might have no interest whatsoever in being re-activated or playing our little games. For his broad view of history Naydler follows in the footsteps of Rudolf Steiner, who during his life was given some beautifully fruitful intuitions; but one only has to look back at what Steiner said about the ancient world to see how utterly unintuitive his ideas about the history of western culture happened to be, or how deeply contaminated his understanding was by the collective prejudices of the time he lived in. As for his supposedly revealed knowledge of forgotten civilizations, Carl Jung's drily humorous earthiness says it all: So long as "Herr Steiner" claims to understand the language of Atlantis but can't understand the Hittite inscriptions recently discovered in the Near East, there is no good reason to get too "excited" about any of the great things he has to say (JL i 203-4). For the pervasive ignorance of history underpinning most modern ideas about both material, and spiritual, evolution see e.g. SW 172-3; for the actual source of our mythologies about Atlantis, ibid. 127-8. *6 Note for example Jung's finely balanced statement from a few years before he died that -- while it was only his extended and solitary study of Gnostic as well as alchemical tradition which at last had shown him something real about "the development NOTES TO PAGES 34735 479 of our unconscious relations to the collective unconscious and the variations our consciousness has undergone" -- we westerners are totally lost without any understanding of the alchemical or Hermetic wisdom which bridges the gap between ancient Gnostics and our modern world. "The Gnostics lived in the first, second, and third centuries. And what was in between? Nothing. And now, today, we suddenly fall into that hole and are confronted with the problems of the collective unconscious which were the same then two thousand years ago -- and we are not prepared to meet that problem" (R.I. Evans, Jung on elementary psychology, New York 1976, 232; cf. JS 350-1). 27 "Our cult of progress": MDR 230/244. The "illusion" of our triumphs: ibid. 227/240. For the Presocratics, their self- evident self-contradictions, and their immensely subtle uses of language see Reality 415-25; ENM 382-4. Failure to approach Jung's work as a whole in the fullness of its ambiguity leads to the ridiculous situation where he is condemned for not being enough of an evolutionist by scientifically-minded thinkers and for being too much of an evolutionist by "traditionalist" authorities on religion (P. Pietikainen, Utopian studies 12/1, 2001, 51-4; R.P. Coomaraswamy in The betrayal of tradition, ed. H. Oldmeadow, Bloomington, IN 2005, 61 with W. Smith, ibid. 266): cf. G.-F. Calian's timely comment, Annual of medieval studies at CEU 16 (2010) 176. 28 Note e.g. his published comments in 1936: "I would call it progress that in the 2,000,000 years that we have existed on earth, we have developed a chin and a decent sort of brain. Historically what we call progress is, after all, just a mushroom growth of coal and oil. Otherwise we are not any more intelligent than the old Greeks or Romans" (New York Times for 4 October 1936; cf. JS 89). Compare also his 480 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL climactic, and equally sarcastic, warning against imagining one is "infinitely cleverer than all the benighted heads of the Middle Ages" (PR 200 §294); JV'i 148-9 (on the Middle Ages as a period when "the idea of any real improvement did not exist ... Real belief in any kind of progress is an absolutely modern invention") with ii 1047-50 (where Jung is forced by the insistently optimistic attitude of a prominent Jungian, Barbara Hannah, to address his "more or less temperamental" tendency to question whether there is "any movement for the better in the world ... one could say things have become better. But in another sense that is most questionable. I don't know whether our life is happier than the life of the primitive man, or whether life today is better than life in the Middle Ages ... it is quite doubtful whether things have become better ... don't forget that we have very limited knowledge ... we simply do not know ..."); RB 330b (on the question of returning to, and slowly working towards completing, the Middle Ages) with n.354 and MDR 223/236; Man and his symbols (New York 1964) 52. And for Jung's demonstration, not only through his writings but also through his way of living, that what haunted him more than anything was the "deplorable shortcoming in modern humanity" due to our complete loss of ancient and medieval sensibilities cf. A. Haaning's comments: JAP 59 (2014) 22 and ("Back to the Middle Ages") 27-8. ? There are some good lessons in human psychology to be learned from observing how those same scientists who used to relish equating increases in relative brain size with an increase in intelligence -- so long as it supported the thesis of our superiority to our ancestors as well as other animals -- are now busy chasing their own tails after discovering that the brain size of humans has been shrinking for thousands of NOTES TO PAGES 35-36 481 years. See e.g. B. Hood, The domesticated brain (London 2014) 3 -- 4: "The finding that the human brain has been getting smaller over our recent evolution runs counter to the generally held view that bigger brains equal more intelligence, and that we are smarter than our prehistoric ancestors ... Nobody knows exactly why the human brain has been shrinking, but it does raise some provocative questions about the relationship between the brain, behaviour and intelligence. First, we make lots of unfounded assumptions about the progress of human intelligence. We assume our Stone Age ancestors must have been backward because the technologies they produced seem so primitive by modern standards. But what if raw human intelligence has not changed so much over the past 20,000 years? What if they were just as smart as modern man, only without the benefit of thousands of generations of accumulated knowledge? We should not assume that we are fundamentally more intelligent than an individual born 20,000 years ago ..." For brain shrinkage and other signs of degeneration cf. also K. McAuliffe, Discover 31/7 (September 2010) 54-9; C.N Shaw and J.T. Stock, Journal of human evolution 30 (2013) 1-8; A.A. Macintosh, R. Pinhasi and J.T. Stock, American journal of physical anthropology 153 (2014) 173 and Journal of archaeological science 52 (2014) 376-90. As for the Darwinian theory of evolution itself, together with the huge number of noble or savage lies which since the time of Darwin have been needed to defend it, see e.g. M. Baigent, Ancient traces (London 1998) 23-39, 100-116. 5° See Parmenides fr. 6.4 -- 9 and Empedocles fr. 2 Diels = Parmenides fr. 13.5-10 and Empedocles fr. 7 Gemelli Marciano; [DPW 221-3 and Reality, especially 83-125, 326 -- 41. "What they call life": Empedocles fr. 15.2 Diels = fr. 15B.6 Gemelli Marciano (to dé bioton kaleousi); cf. ENM 360 with 482 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL Reality 404-5, 419. For the language used to describe humans by Empedocles as well as Parmenides compare the Aeschylean Prometheus bound 447-50 -- a passage which eloquently underlines the fact that, for both of them, any real process of human evolution has not yet even begun. 31 See e.g. R. Williams, Open to judgement (London 1994) 103; D. Brown, God and enchantment of place (Oxford 2004) 154-5. And for the continuing vitality of this theme, which is so much favoured by property developers across the very same region of southern Switzerland where the Eranos gatherings have always taken place, see M. Caratti's editorial in La regione Ticino, 12 June 2013, 1 ("Dal momento in cui Gest: muore su una croce ... non esiste pit nessun luogo sacro sulla terra. Sacro é l'uomo wee) 52 See APMM; IDPW, Reality, together with my comments in ENM, especially 354-6; Works and conversations 22 (2011) 22- 37; PSIE with L. Gemelli Marciano, Die Vorsokratiker ii (2" ed., Berlin 2013). One would hope there is no need to emphasize how different this is from the familiar scholarly practice of picking out the religious, mystical and even shamanic ideas inadvertently "inherited" by Presocratic philosophers from their ancestors -- only to claim that the unique feature of Presocratic thought was its constant efforts to rationalize these older traditions. See for example H. Diels, Parmenides: Lehrgedicht (Berlin 1897) 3-27; K. Joél, Der Ursprung der Natur-Philosophie aus dem Geiste der Mystik (Jena 1906); F.M. Cornford, Classical quarterly 16 (1922) 137-50, 17 (1923) 1-12, and Principium sapientiae (Cambridge 1952); W. Jaeger, The theology of the early Greek philosophers (Oxford 1947); E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the irrational (Berkeley 1951); and, on the concept of "inheritance", G. Vlastos, Gnomon 27 (1955) 70. NOTES TO PAGES 36-44 483 33 On the nature of Parmenides' logic see especially Reality 11-306, 563-85 with ENM 369-81; PSIE 43-126, 215-87 with Ancient philosophy 28 (2008) 21-48. For Friedrich Nietzsche's fantasies about the icy coldness and "rigor mortis" of the goddess' teachings, see his Philosophy in the tragic age of the Greeks (South Bend 1962) 69-90. Martin Heidegger's even clumsier misunderstandings of the poetic language and style so exquisitely, and deliberately, used by Parmenides are on full display in his Parmenides (Bloomington, IN 1992). As for Rudolf Steiner's quaintly patronizing words about the role played by Parmenides "in the progress of human development toward the stage of thought experience", these too are utter nonsense -- partly due to the numerous mistakes and inaccuracies in Steiner's account of Presocratic philosophy, most of them imported by him without any question or discrimination from the textbooks of his time, and partly due to his insistence on forcing everything into a naive evolutionary mould (so e.g. The riddles of philosophy, Spring Valley, NY 1973, 28-30). Much the same as with the crude misreadings of Heraclitus by the great yogi Sri Aurobindo (Essays in philosophy and yoga = The complete works of Sri Aurobindo xiii, Pondicherry 1998, 215-54; for Heraclitus' so-called "/ogos doctrine" see Reality 566-7), the lesson waiting to be learned is that spiritual teachers are all well and good but to mistake their intuitive insights for divine omniscience is a little childish. Even the most genuine spiritual realizations have little power by themselves, regardless of all the rhetoric and wishful thinking, to correct the prejudice and collective misunderstandings embedded in the human brain. 34 Altogether typical in this regard is the so-called Traditionalist, Frithjof Schuon, whose writings on the subject demonstrate just how far removed he is from representing 484 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL any authentically "primordial" tradition -- or even from being able to convey some genuine understanding of the impulses that gave rise to our western world (Logic and transcendence, Bloomington, IN 2009, 42-6, 95-6). Schuon's "logic" is simply the humanized reasoning of Plato and Aristotle which, as the last head of the ancient Platonic school emphasized with appropriate finality, is altogether incapable of accessing reality. For Damascius' elaborate contrast between the apparatus of human reasoning (apodeixeis anthrépikai) and the simplicity of divine intuition, which is precisely what logic once used to be, see e.g. his Questions and answers about first principles 1.5 (Traité des premiers principes i, ed. L.G. Westerink and J. Combés, Paris 1986, 9-11; Problems and solutions concerning first principles, trans. S. Ahbel -- -Rappe, New York 2010, 72 -- 4) with P. Athanassiadi's comments in Damascius: The philosophical history (Athens 1999) 55. And for some timely help in exploding the mythical notion that rationality and reasoning are somehow designed to help us arrive at the truth, see the recent research published by H. Mercier and D. Sperber, Behavioral and brain sciences 34 (2011) 57-74. 35 For Parmenides as a lawgiver, for the extremely real sense in which his entire logic was given as laws, and for the intimate links connecting this lawgiving with prophecy as well as with the practice of incubation, see LDPW, Reality 15-178, 563-76. On the absolutely fundamental importance of not changing anything in these laws see [DPW 209-10 and Reality 55-9, 563 plus the further references cited; Deuteronomy 4:2 with e.g. D.I. Block, How I love your Torah, o Lord! (Eugene 2011) 6 n.3; and the usual rationalizing modern discussions such as G. Camassa's in Les savoirs de l'écriture, ed. M. Detienne (Lille 1988) 147-50, in Le Mgislateur et la loi dans [Antiquité, ed. P. NOTES TO PAGES 44-47 485 Sineux (Caen 2005) 29-36 and in Scrittura e mutamento delle leggi nel mondo antico (Rome 2011). 36 The book I had come across was M. Fabbri and A. Trotta, Una scuola -- collegio di eta augustea (Rome 1989). I integrated the archaeological discoveries with Parmenides' own poetry in IDPW; cf. ENM 375-80, Reality 578 and more recent discussions such as L. Bergemann, Kraftmetaphystk und Mysterienkult im Neuplatonismus (Munich 2006) 19, 301-25. For the discoveries in Parmenides' hometown of Velia and their crucial links with prophetic tradition note also G. Pugliese Carratelli in Magna Grecia, ed. Pugliese Carratelli (Milan 1988) 233, G. Camassa in Magna Grecia e Oriente mediterraneo (Atti del trentanovesimo convegno di studi sulla Magna Grecia, Taranto 2000) 348, L. Vecchio, Le iscrizioni greche di Velia (Vienna 2003) 74-6, 91 and Filosoft e medici (Pozzuoli 2004) 38, 40, 46, PSIE 64 (cf. L. Rossetti and M. Pulpito, ibid. 16); for their links with the practice of incubation, S. Musitelli, La parola del passato 35 (1980) 241-55, G. Sacco, Rivista di filologia e di istruzione classica 109 (1981) 36-40, Pugliese Carratelli 230, Camassa 347 and G. Costa, La sirena di Archimede (Alessandria 2008) 168-81. 37 For Parmenides, his successor Zeno, and the modesty of their hometown in southern Italy versus the imperialist "arrogance" of Athens, cf. e.g. [DPW 197-203, 225-6 and Reality 301-6; PSIE 108-110. On the issue of relations with Athens see also APMM 155-6, 339-41; SW 114-16, 127-8, 148. I documented at length the traditional practices of learning how to breathe, be silent, use one's senses to the full, in Rea/ity. One sign of how completely out of touch modern intellectuals, including so-called experts on Jung, are from such realities is provided 486 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL by the ridiculous statements of Wolfgang Giegerich: "It has been said about Pythagoras, who believed in the transmigration of souls, that when he erected himself and craned his neck with all his mental powers he was effortlessly able to view every detail in his ten or even twenty former lives" (J/7P 6/1, 2004, 23, supposedly citing Empedocles). In fact what Empedocles had said about Pythagoras is that he was able to see back into previous lifetimes not by craning his neck but through conscious breathing, when he stretched his lungs and diaphragm a certain way (Empedocles fr. 129 Diels = fr. 186 Gemelli Marciano; ENM 355, 400-1). Giegerich should perhaps think twice before criticizing Jungians, as well as Jung, for the fundamentally amateurish and unscholarly nature of their publications (J//7'P 6/1, 2004, 41-2, A. Casement, JAP 56, 2011, 542). 8 Aristotle, On prophesying in dreams 464a20-22. For the praises still heaped on him because of this text see e.g. E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the irrational (Berkeley 1951) 120 ("coolly rational without being superficial, and he shows at times a brilliant insight"); P.J. van der Eijk, Medicine and philosophy in classical antiquity (Cambridge 2005) 189 ("intriguing ... sophisticated"); W.V. Harris, Dreams and experience in classical antiquity (Cambridge, MA 2009) 233. 39"... While asleep no one is worth anything ...": Plato, Laws 807d -- 808c; the continuation, where Plato specifies that all children absolutely have to be supervised each single moment of every day because otherwise they are no better than beasts, is also worth reading. The difference between this attitude and the great "nocturnal work" imposed on Jung by his soul (RB 211b; L.S. Owens, The Gnostic 3, 2010, 30, 41) is as plain as NOTES TO PAGES 47-50 487 the difference between night and day. For Parmenides' own approach to the unconsciousness of darkness and night -- which to him is no reason to avoid them but, on the contrary, an invitation to penetrate and explore them -- see [DPW 64-5 with ENM 377-8 n.108 and also R. Padel, In and out of the mind (Princeton 1992) 71. The traditional mystical view of the soul's prophetic powers while the body sleeps at night (so e.g. Pindar, fr. 131b Maehler) would of course be subjected to the usual rationalizing treatment by Plato (Republic 571d-572b, Timaeus 70d-72b) and was still acceptable to Aristotle right at the start of his philosophical career (fr. 10 Rose = On philosophy fr. 12a Untersteiner). But for the disparagement of night, as opposed to daytime, in Aristotle's own later writings cf. PJ. van der Eijk, De insomniis, de divinatione per somnum (Berlin 1994) 319; and note how different the attitude to sleep and dreams held by Plato in his "mature" old age has become from what was clearly the attitude of the historical Socrates (W.V. Harris, Dreams and experience in classical antiquity, Cambridge, MA 2009, 25, 55, 161, 250-2). 40 "From earliest dawn until sunrise" and "this is the time ...": see Plato, Laws 951d, 961b with, for the traditions he followed and then obscured, [DPW 207-13. It will be noted that Jung, too, was drawn to an awareness of the unique importance associated with "the sun at the moment of rising": with "the moment", "the moment of dawn" ( /4P 58, 2013, 165 with n.6, cf. also JZ i 44). On the depths of darkness and night as the ultimate source of laws see JDPW 213-19; and on the crucial linkage in ancient Greece betweeen prophecy and darkness cf. R. Padel's fine observations, In and out of the mind (Princeton 1992) 69-77. As for Arthur Versluis' claim that, with its exclusive focus on a spirituality of light, "Platonism represents 488 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL the original intellectual inheritance of the West" -- few assertions could be more misleading or misinformed (Religion of light, Minneapolis 2013, 26; cf. 83, "the essential wisdom tradition of the West"). "t'W. Burkert, Lore and science in ancient Pythagoreanism (Cambridge, MA 1972) 121-3; APMM 368. In other respects, though, Plato must certainly have worn the patience of his Pythagorean hosts rather thin -- for instance when, after sending messages begging them to find a practical way to break him out of prison because the man he had naively wanted to train to become a philosopher-king had locked him up, he went on to criticize them for being too practical. See SW 155-7. *? On the extent of Plato's indebtedness to earlier mystical as well as mythical traditions, and his failure to grasp their subtleties, see 4PMTMM,; on his rationalizations of those earlier traditions, JDPW, and on his inability to hold or transmit the reality they contained, SW. Neither can Plato in all honesty even be credited with discovering the famous Platonic archetypes or "ideas" (cf. APMM 88-93, 103-7 for Pythagoreans; J. Broackes, Classical quarterly 59, 2009, 46-59 for Socrates): basically he just tried to make sense of them with his reasoning mind, which is quite impossible, and ended up creating a terrible mess. For his transpositions of initiatory and mystery terminology see e.g. C. Riedweg, Mystertenterminologie bei Platon, Philon und Klemens von Alexandrien (Berlin 1987); A. Bernabé in Plato's 'Sophist' revisited, ed. B. Bossi and T.M. Robinson (Berlin 2013) 41-56; B. Sattler in Philosophy and salvation in Greek religion, ed. V. Adluri (Berlin 2013) 151-90. 3 For the general situation see [DPW 39-43 and also, on the nature of facts, Reality 17-22. One example of flesh-and-blood NOTES TO PAGES 50-53 489 figures reacting to Plato's inclusion of them as characters inside his published fantasies is offered in Athenaeus' Deipnosophists 505d (Gorgias 82A15a Diels -- Kranz; Reality 483). "* On killing "father Parmenides", the details about the Velian background, and the related discrediting of Parmenides' adopted son Zeno by Plato in his other fictitious dialogue called Parmenides, see Sophist 241d -- 242a with IDPW 39-45, 150-62; Reality 303-5; PSIE 107-113, 232, 275-84. As for "Elea', the crude form of the name Velia which was to become popular in the West largely thanks to Plato, see ENM 375 n.101. It will be noted that the word "father" or patér, applied by him here to Parmenides, also had the much broader sense of "ancestor": G. Nagy, Pindar's Homer (Baltimore 1990) 177 §58, 195 §88. On the enormity of patricide for ancient Greeks see e.g. J.N. Bremmer's comments in Interpretations of Greek mythology, ed. Bremmer (London 1987) 49: "An ever-present possibility, parricide was considered to be one of the most appalling of crimes ... Imputation of parricide was one of the 'unspeakable things' which could result in legal action; even the word 'parricide' was only mentioned with reluctance, if at all", and note also Plato's own strictures, Laws 869a- -- c, 880e -- 881e. For the quite insanely foolish lengths to which some contemporary academics are still willing to go in the remote hope of being able to distance Plato from any accusation of committing patricide, see e.g. J.A. Palmer, Plato's reception of Parmenides (Oxford 1999) 145-7, D. O'Brien in Plato's Sophist' revisited, ed. B. Bossi and T.M. Robinson (Berlin 2013) 117-55. And for the repeated murders of Parmenides committed ever since Plato's time by not only distorting his teaching, but also violating and changing his own words, see especially Reality 117-44, 566-9; PSIE 217-29, 490 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL * See e.g. Strabo, Geography 14.1.44 (tois d' allois adytos estin ho topos kai olethrios, of an incubation shrine offering access to the underworld), [DPW 81-3; and for the full implications of Parmenides' outi se moira kaké proupempe (Parmenides fr. 1.26 Diels = fr. 8A.32 Gemelli Marciano) see ibid. 61-5, 101-5. On the perfectly specific and coherent geography of Parmenides' descent into the underworld cf., aside from IDPW, W. Burkert, Phronesis 14 (1969) 1-30 = Kleine Schriften viii (Gottingen 2008) 1-27; G. Cerri, La parola del passato 50 (1995) 458-67 and Parmenide di Elea (Milan 1999) 98-109, 172-83; ENM 369-81 and Reality 23-272, 563-70; L. Gemelli Marciano, Ancient philosophy 28 (2008) 21-46 and PSIE 65-81, plus the further references at [DPW 239-40 and ENM 373 n.94. Those brave academics who try to cast doubt on Parmenides' destination (e.g. M. Miller, Oxford studies in ancient philosophy 30, 2006, 1-47) no longer have the remotest understanding of how to approach, or read with respect, ancient mystical texts. " For Plato's murder of Parmenides together with his paternal logic as stemming from the desperate need to qualify what Parmenides himself had left dangerously and, for all the busy thinking of our "wandering minds", very frustratingly unqualified see the plain statement he puts into the mouth of the "stranger from Velia" at Sophist 241d (... patraloian ... biazesthai to te mé on hés esti kata ti kai to on au palin hos ouk esti péi ...); Reality 83-8, 97, 304-6. The whole point and purpose behind Parmenides' most basic law of logic -- that reality as well as everything in it "either is or is not", without the slightest possibility of compromise or qualification -- was that anyone willing to take the risk of meditating on it will sooner or later be brought to a direct awareness of the timeless reality beyond all existence (IDPW 162-223, Reality 44-8). The whole point and purpose behind Plato's explicit violation of this law was NOTES TO PAGES 54-58 491 to restore the possibility that what is not also "in one sense" (kata ti) is and that what is also, "in a certain respect" (péz), is not. By violating Parmenides' laws with his patricidal little "in one sense" and innocent-sounding "in a certain respect", with his endless need to qualify, his constant ifs and buts, Plato was able to lay the ground for all the complicated theorizing of later western thought. At the same time, he also ended up walking straight down the path of "is but also is not" which the goddess in Parmenides' poem had already mocked as being the quintessence of human futility (Parmenides fr. 6.4 -- 9 Diels = fr. 13.5-10 Gemelli Marciano). 47 Parmenides fr. 6.4 -- 7 Diels = fr. 13.5-8 Gemelli Marciano; Reality 83-110. "8 The roots and source of every element: Hesiod, Theogony 736-45, 807-10; M.E. Pellikaan -- Engel, Hesiod and Parmenides (Amsterdam 1974) 19-30, 49; JDPW 51-3, 125-6. Parmenides' logic as madness: Aristotle, On generation and corruption 325a13-23 (... maniai paraplésion einai ... oudena gar ton mainomenén exestanai tosouton ... dia tén manian); cf. Reality 212, 479 and, for some crucial remarks on the Academic as well as sophistic background to Aristotle's statement, L. Gemelli Marciano, Democrito e LAccademia (Berlin 2007), especially 120-1. " For the stranger from Velia on the madness involved in deciding to kill Parmenides see Plato, Sophist 242a (manikos einai). Aside from being obvious to Plato himself (maniais orgés ton gennétorén tolmésai kteinai tina: Laws 869a), the connection between patricide and madness is deeply embedded in the unconsciousness of western culture (cf. e.g, A.N. Pfau, Madness in the realm, PhD thesis, University of Michigan 2008, 152-3); 492 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL and Jacques Derrida does well to note the potent presence of this connection here in Plato's Sophist (On hospitality, Stanford 2000, 3-11). But otherwise Derrida's analysis of the passage is invalidated by his strange failure to realize that the stranger is not just a stranger, any stranger -- but an Eleatés xenos, a stranger who quite specifically has come from Velia. °° The most famous discussion of sacred madness or prophetic frenzy in western literature is, inappropriately but predictably, the iconic passage where Plato posits the existence of "divine" or good kinds of madness which are quite separate and distinct from any other kind of craziness (Phaedrus 244a-245b, 249c -- d, 265a, 266a). Certainly this rationalizing, even sophistical, attempt at separating good types of madness from bad ones can make for some pretty literature -- but its popularity shows how, as a culture, we always will prefer empty rhetoric over reality. The truth is that any such distinction is completely artificial (E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the irrational, Berkeley 1951, 68; for the ambiguities involved cf. also [DPW 55-92), ignoring all the paradoxical and chaotic and hellish aspects of madness as an actual reality. On the deceptiveness, and dangerousness, of such superficial distinctions see Rea/ity 438-41; and note how, in spite of his high-flown insistence that we shouldn't be afraid of madness (Phaedrus 245b), when it came down to daily life Plato wanted to have as little to do with mad people as possible (A. Gocer, Apeiron 32/4, 1999, 32). 51 RBu 230 (cf. RB 230b). For the two spirits see RB 207-8, 229-30, 238-9 n.91 ("... the dark underworld of the spirit of the depths ..."); and, for Jung's initiation into the mysteries of the underworld by the spirit of the depths, 246 n.162. It will be noted that, although Jung formally dedicates some sections of the Red book to the theme of descending into the NOTES TO PAGES 58-59 493 underworld (RB 237b, 288b), the presence of the underworld is constant almost throughout; and the "technique of descent" that he employed corresponds, even down to the smallest details, to ancient methods for the practice of incubation (/P 68; MDR 174/181; RB 246 n.161). Also worth noting is the fact that Jung's two favourite terms for describing his descents, katabasis and nekyia, both derive straight from ancient Greece. For katabasis see already FJ 540 §300J (25 February 1912) and, as an early indicator of his enthusiasm for the word, the handwritten note he tucked away at the back of his own copy of Albrecht Dieterich's Nekyia "katdabasis ...!"); also ST 365 §572, KY 18, 86, SM 139-40 §213, RB 239 n.96, SL 38 §80, 120 §264, NZ i 694, ii 1194, PA 329 §436 (compare M. Stein's comments, JAP 57, 2012, 281), PR 508 §828, MC 350 § 493, CT 355 §674. Nekyia: see especially ETG 103~4 and PA 53 n.2; also SM 138-9 §§210-13, SZ 38 §80, 107 §239, PA 120 §156, 141 §178, ACU 184 §311, Aion 209 §327, ST 431 §671, MC 73 n.211. 52 On the madness constantly standing behind the thin facade of reasoning, see for example RB 298a. For reason as poison, note especially his powerful account of how not only have we all been poisoned but we then proceed to "spread poison and paralysis around us by wanting to train all the world around us to be rational" (RBu 280a; cf. RB 280b). On a superficial level one could compare the hostile attitude to rationality that manifested in the circles surrounding Stefan George and Ludwig Klages: see e.g. R.E. Norton, Secret Germany (Ithaca, NY 2002) 226-8 and, for Jung's relation and reaction to both men, CT'181 n.3 (cf. 347 §657) with P. Bishop, The Dionysian self (Berlin 1995) 197 n.26, 291, 302-3 and n.7, 309-11. But Gemelli Marciano makes the essential point that what we are confronted with in the Red book is far less a question of literary 494 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL concepts, or even attitudes, than of hard inner experience (PSIE 231-3, 280). *3 For Jung on "outraged Nature" seeking revenge against "the individual and his rationally ordered world ... for the violence his reason has done to her" see especially PR 344 §531 together with the commentaries of bewildered scholars such as L.O. Gomez in Curators of the Buddha, ed. D.S. Lopez (Chicago 1995) 199-200. And note also Jung's concluding words to the same paragraph, "Man is never helped in his suffering by what he thinks of for himself; only suprahuman, revealed truth lifts him out of his distress" (an expression of the purest Gnostic sentiment: W.C. Grese, Corpus hermeticum XIII and early Christian literature, Leiden 1979, 72, 84). On the apocalyptically destructive powers of reason, cf. e.g. JL ii 209 (January 1955); and compare his much earlier comments in the Red book contrasting the living experience of God with the "ashes of rationality" (RBu 337a, cf. RB 339a). As for the passage already cited earlier, where Jung describes embarking on the path of conscious suffering to save the divine from having to suffer "because I wanted God to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason more than God's secret intentions", see PP 6 (1975) 12: and on his personal sense of needing to balance, or compensate for, everyone else's reasonableness cf. SZ 704 §1585. Without any doubt, as Walter Odajnyk has been honest enough to point out, nowadays that would include the need to compensate for the reasonableness of many Jungians. Compare his frank comment on Jung's words about all the murderers among the scholars: "Unfortunately, one could add, the same can be said of psychotherapists and psychoanalysts whose rational reductive explanations kill the living spirit and undermine any creative NOTES TO PAGES 59-61 495 resolution of the problems they are asked to address" (PP 53, 2010, 449). *4 In a strange monument to lopsided scholarship Sonu Shamdasani cites part of an unpublished letter that Jung wrote to his colleague Josef Lang on 17 January 1918, where he warns Lang about the risks of working with the unconscious, as a plain illustration of Jung's absolute refusal to be dismissive of reason or science (cf. RBu 209a and RB 207a, unwisely followed by 8.L. Drob, Reading the Red book, New Orleans 2012, 181). "The danger lies in the delusion of being a prophet which often is the result of working with the unconscious. It is the devil who says: 'Be disdainful of reason and science, humanity's supreme power. This is something we must never forget." Shamdasani correctly notes that Jung here is quoting Mephistopheles, the devil in Goethe's Faust ("Verachte nur Vernunft und Wissenschaft, Des Menschen allerhochste Kraft", 1.1851 -- 2: in the original letter Jung writes out these words as verse). But he completely fails to take into account the intense and enduring sympathy Jung felt for Goethe's Mephistopheles (MDR 68-9/60-1, 85/80, 221-2/234-5, JP 212), not to mention the intimacy of his relationship with the devil (RB 259-61). He also omits the previous paragraph of this same letter which, aside from showing how eager Jung was to enlist Lang in the project of presenting a solid scientific foundation for his psychology (cf. SL 825), helps as well to highlight how little Jung's own unconscious was ultimately committed to such a project. The multiple mistakes in Shamdasani's English translation at RB 207a ("prophet's delusion" instead of "delusion of being a prophet" for "Prophetenwahn', "That is never appropriate" for "Das ist nie zu vergessen") are -- especially from someone 496 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL claiming to be alone in setting true scholarly standards for the study of Jung (Cult fictions, London 1998, 112; JAP 45, 2000, 469) -- inexcusable. > For instance M.H. Barreto makes a noble effort to challenge "the misunderstanding" of Jung as someone who "discards or undervalues reason", and to correct it by quoting Jung's own assurance that "I am far from wishing to belittle the divine gift of reason, man's highest faculty" (JJ 9/1, 2015, 37, citing ACU 94 §174). But if Barreto had turned back just one page, and taken the trouble to read such a reassuring statement in its context, he would have realized that this apparent exaltation of reason as humanity's divine and highest faculty is dripping with irony. In fact, despite his propitiatory claim to be "far from wishing to belittle the divine gift of reason, man's highest faculty", Jung has just done precisely that -- describing how the attachment to rationality derives its power from an "infantile parental complex" which always "turns into sheer intellectuality", and painting the most gruesome picture of reason as emitting "a deceptive light" that "spreads a darkness over all those things which it would be most needful for us to know" (ibid. 93-4 §§173 -- 4; compare his scornful rejection of the worshipful attitude towards reason as "our overwhelming illusion", SZ 261 §598, as well as his horror at the "rationalistic darkness which will yet extinguish the little lamps of understanding", JAP 46, 2001, 194). With equal determination Jung also goes on to do the exact same thing elsewhere, disdainfully mocking the authority of reason while openly dethroning it from its usurped position as humanity's "supreme arbiter" (PR 452 §735). Barreto continues to argue for the idea of Jung as a defender of rationalism by quoting his statement that "a relativation of rationalism is needed, but not an abandonment of reason, for the reasonable thing NOTES TO PAGES 61-63 497 for us is to turn to the inner man and his vital needs" (JJ 9/1, 2015, 37, citing JL ii 286). Here too he fails to note the deviousness of Jung's dark subtlety as he twists the very essence of reason inside out and outside in, ironically insisting that the only reasonable course of action is to pursue the one thing reasonableness resists more than anything else: the impulse to turn inside (compare his abrupt use of the same strategy in OPT 76; SD 380-1 §§738-9). And it's the identical story again when, in one of his seminars, Jung not only praises animals for their reasonableness but sweetly insists that we humans can only become reasonable if we make the effort to imitate them: "for it is very difficult to be reasonable" (JV i 168; cf. JLi 119). This of course is Jung skilfully and systematically undermining the very basis of rationality by standing on its head the standard western doctrine that animals are a/oga, beasts deprived of reason. *6 For underworld as place of paradox in antiquity see e.g. APMM 77 with n.27, IDPW 67-8; compare Jung's comments linking the spirit of the depths with paradox, RB 229b; and on his appreciation for the deliberate ambiguity and multiple meanings of "the ancients" see RBu 244 n.144. >? The suppression of Jung's strong desire to express a parallelism between his own destiny and the fate of Odysseus in descending to the underworld is, itself, a sorry story. The German edition of Memories, dreams, reflections does permit him to reflect broodingly on the solitary destiny that had been assigned to him of performing, "like Odysseus, a nekyia, the descent into dark Hades"; but in the American and British versions this has been surgically removed (ETG 103-4, cf. NL 102 with RB 304 n.223 and 8. Muramoto, Spring, 1987, 166-7). Shamdasani has also dug up an unpublished note, 498 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL short but poignant, by Jung's secretary about the central chapter of Memories, dreams, reflections called "Confrontation with the unconscious": it states that "The strong excitement Jung underwent still reverberates when he tells of these matters. He proposes as the epigraph for this chapter the quotation from the Odyssey, "Happily escaped from death'" (JAP 45, 2000, 465, citing MDRC 120 n.1). This comment by Aniela Jaffé is certainly very significant -- although Shamdasani seems to be unaware here not only that ever since 1962 it has been included in the published German edition of Jung's biography (ETG 180 n.4), but also that the unpublished Protocols on which the biography is based contain Jung's explicit statement recommending these same words from the Odyssey be used as an opening quote or motto for the entire book rather than one chapter alone. See JP 147 where, straight after being invited to speak openly about the whole scope of his life's work, Jung is recorded as quoting the Homeric saying "Glad to have escaped from death" and noting that in its original Greek wording it would make the most perfect epigram or motto if it could be printed right at the beginning of his autobiography. And yet all these details only add extra force to Shamdasani's conclusion that "with the complete omission of all these statements in the English edition, the Homeric echoes of Jung's confrontation with the unconscious were lost, together with the connection to his numerous references to Odysseus' nedyia in the Collected Works" (470 n.5). For the source of the Greek words Jung so much wanted to quote from Homer see Odyssey 9.63, 9.566, 10.134. On the ancient background to the traditions about Pythagoras' descent into the underworld see W. Burkert, Phronesis 14 (1969) 1-30 = Kleine Schriften viii (Gottingen 2008) 1-27 and Lore and science in ancient Pythagoreanism (Cambridge, MA 1972) 151-61; APMM,; S. Schorn in 4 history NOTES TO PAGES 63-64 499 of Pythagoreanism, ed. C.A. Huffman (Cambridge 2014) 300-1; and as a typical example of the persistent attempts by "rational" scholars to keep suppressing any traces of these traditions see now L. Zhmud, Pythagoras and the early Pythagoreans (Oxford 2012) 216-18. *8 Experiencing what happened to Christ in the underworld: RB 243b, cf. 304b; L.S. Owens and S.A. Hoeller in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2TM ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 979. "Travelling to hell means becoming hell oneself": RBu 240a, 244a (cf. RB 240b, 244a). Christ, too, became Hell: RB 242b. Toshio Kawai offers a frightening example of orthodox Jungian reactions to such statements when he notes that, although Jung's descent into hell was "surely terrible", his account of it shows he "has never lost sight of the position of the ego. This was not a total loss" (JAP 57, 2012, 381). *? For Rosa's own delightfully caustic comments on the scene see Lettere inedite di Salvator Rosa a G.B. Ricciardi, ed. A. de Rinaldis (Rome 1939) 141 §107; also X.F. Salomon in Salvator Rosa, ed. H. Langdon (London 2010) 87. Quite predictably the archetypal modern scholar, Carl Huffman, inverts the entire symbolism of the painting: "Pythagoras himself is an obscure figure ... What is at the center of the painting and takes up the bulk of the space is the reaction to Pythagoras by the other figures. Thus, the historical Pythagoras may not be as important as the reactions to him" (4 history of Pythagoreanism, Cambridge 2014, 2). For Huffman's unfailing ability to turn Pythagorean tradition on its head and, regardless of any real cost, sacrifice the most important evidence in the name of some illusory rationality see e.g. Reading ancient texts, ed. S. 500 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL Stern-Gillet and K. Corrigan (Leiden 2007) i 57-94 and The Continuum companion to Plato, ed. G.A. Press (London 2012) 26 together with my warnings in Classical review 44 (1994) 294 -- 6 and SW 155-8. * For Jung as scientist, and psychology as science, see e.g. S. Shamdasani, JM 29-99 along with the surreally one- dimensional essays in Jung and the question of science, ed. R.A. Jones (Hove 2014). R. Main in his book The rupture of time (Hove 2004) not only was unable to take advantage of the Red book's publication, but also downplayed the complexity of many statements by Jung about science which had already been published. And although he is to be commended for noting Jung's "bold attempt to return to the kind of unitary world-view that had prevailed before the emergence of modern science" (123), his belief that this just involves skipping "two or three centuries of the dominance of reason and science" (2) is more than a little wide of the mark. *! See e.g. Jung's letter of 4 December 1931 to Gustav Heyer, carefully insisting on the strategic need to distance Jungian psychology "for quite a long time" from any association with mysticism or parapsychology (H.T. Hakl, Eranos, Sheffield 2013, 66), or the angry letter he wrote to Rascher Verlag on 27 July 1957 "claiming that it had been the responsibility of Rascher, as his publisher, to ensure that his psychology was not presented as unscientific, or even alchemical" (P. Bishop, Seminar 34, 1998, 381). Bishop goes on to describe not only how Jung's "disciples were manoeuvring in the background to influence the reception of his psychology" but also what a significant role Jung happened to play "in establishing his public image", constantly promoting himself "as a scientist who nonetheless managed to go beyond the boundaries of NOTES TO PAGES 64-66 501 conventional science" (381, 384). For more of his perpetual shufflings behind the scenes see D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 550-5 -- as well as independent reports about the lengths Jung would go to and the concealments he would keep operating "in order to preserve his scientific reputation" (P. Brunton, Reftections on my life and writings = The notebooks of Paul Brunton vili, Burdett, NY 1987, 214). *? For personalities no. 1 and no. 2 see MDR with JP 297-303; also D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 15-16. On the correlation of personalities no. 1 and no. 2 with the spirit of this time and the spirit of the depths see 8. Shamdasani, RB 207-8. Dead systems: RB 232b. "True self": MDR 55/45. "True life": ibid. 18/4, 214/225. For the spirit of the depths, the spirit of this time, science and reason cf. e.g. RB 229b, 234a. 3 Mark Saban well emphasizes the fundamentally "dual nature of the human personality" according to Jung, a duality which regardless of every Jungian cliché will never in a human's lifetime be outgrown or integrated into a homogenous whole: a dualism of two "radically incompatible" personalities which, although perceived and noticed "only by the very few" (IMDR 55/45), presents a constant threat to the psyche's unity and sustains a tension that will never be resolved (How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and M. Stein, Hove 2013, 17-20). This is the underlying reason why Jung himself always stressed how complicated he was and how full of contradictions he, as well as his work, happened to be. See e.g. JZ i 441; his letter to E.A. Bennet dated 10 October 1956 ( JAP 45, 2000, 466); T. Keller, Inward light 35 (1972) 11 (cf. The memoir of Tina Keller -- Jenny, ed. W.K. Swan, New Orleans 2011, 20 §47); D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 300. 502 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL °4 For the fundamental conflict in Empedocles between two opposing spirits or "daimonic" beings, Aphrodite versus "mad Strife", see Reality 345-461; for Aphrodite against Persephone in Parmenides, ibid. 205-20. It will be noted that the competing claims of both spirits have to be balanced in our human awareness and consciously given their places in our lives, just as Jung himself emphasized (Reality 215-30, 255-94, 377-487; RB 238b). For Jung's early acknowledgement of Empedocles see ZZ 79 §203 with P. Bishop, The Dionysian self (Berlin 1995) 37 -- 8. In the same text he had just evoked Empedocles as a prime example of the "ardent desire for truth" (ZL 70 §179), although anyone familiar with Empedocles' writings will realize that his presence and influence on Jung also extend far beyond these two mentions of his name. See e.g. ZL 83 §217 ("The elements began to love and hate each other, and multiplicity was born out of their opposition") and even 83 §218 on "the roots of dualism" (for Jung on Empedocles' "roots" cf. PR 38 n.9, 167 n.5; AS 195 §242). 'Tellingly, Freud too was very glad to acknowledge Empedocles as anticipating his own most fundamental views about the essential polarity and duality of the human psyche: see G. Tourney, Bulletin of the history of medicine 30 (1956) 109-17. For the imagery of the brass band as symbolic of Jung's superficial and worldly personality no. 1 see his finely accurate self-characterization: MMDR 204/214. The real-life brass bands that evoked this striking dream image are listed by him in the still unpublished Protocols for his autobiography (JP 83-4). °6 See, for example, Paul Bishop's comments in 1998 (Seminar 34, 384) on the active suppression of the Red book specifically because it questions the conventional image of Jung as a scientist. Cary de Angulo's personal notes about Jung and his NOTES TO PAGES 67-68 503 Red book, dating from the early 1920s, are especially precious in this regard. Note, in particular, her mention of how certain he was that he would totally "lose out" as a scientist if the book was ever published; her reference, again, to his conviction that by publishing it he would permanently exclude himself from being able to enter into battle in "the world of rational science', and her own wish that there was some way he could make the book available to all the people who need it while at the same time protecting himself against the "stupidity" of those who would reject it (RB 212b, 214a; CBA). In an excellent demonstration of this stupidity, soon after its publication the Jungian scholar Robert Segal dramatically cursed the Red book for expressing "a shocking hatred by Jung of science per se" and dismissed it as "an embarrassment" that "should have been kept locked away forever". He even, irony of ironies, cites Aristotle as an eminent example of what Jung should have aspired to be (J//S 6, 2014, 74-9). But in fact all Segal has done is revive, quite unconsciously, the age-old game already played by Aristotle of trying to salvage the respectable parts of Presocratic wisdom while trashing whatever seems "unscientific" or mystical. See APMM with my further comments in ENM 350-6. 67 "Took away my belief in science ... the inexplicable and paradoxical": Red book, folio i verso = RB 229b; cf. 238a Gung begs his soul to protect him from science and keep him far away from the bondage of its cleverness), 267 n.44, 307-8, 313a, 336b. Science as a poison in spite of its advantages: RB 278-83. The magical incantations sung "in the ancient manner" ("nach uralter Weise"): 283-6. It will be noted that for ancient Greeks, and especially in the magical or Orphic circles associated with healers like Empedocles, the single word pharmakon meant both poison and incantation; remedy as well 504 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL as spell. See e.g. D. Collins, Magic in the ancient world (Oxford 2008); F. Jourdan, Revue de I' histoire des religions 225 (2008) 5-36. Murray Stein has, correctly and very appropriately, connected this dramatic passage in the Red book about magical incantations to ancient Orphic traditions (JAP 57, 2012, 291-3). For Jung's fascination with these traditions see JPPF 4/1 (1912) 167-8, 178, 370-3, 398 = Psychology of the unconscious (New York 1916) 133-4, 147, 373-7, 406; RB 237 n.83, 301-2 n.211, 327 n.340, 364; Stein 291-4 plus G. Quispel, Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica (Leiden 2008) 249-50, 255-60. And note, too, his crucial quotation from Goethe's poem "Urworte. Orphisch" near the start of the Red book which has been pointed out by Paul Bishop (How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and M. Stein, Hove 2013, 69, citing RB 233-4). Jung's own pencil markings inside the books belonging to his personal library (e.g. W. Schultz, Dokumente der Gnosis, Jena 1910, Ixxxv -- lxxxvii; H. Leisegang, Die Gnosis, Leipzig 1924, 99; cf. AN vii 118) also show his very specific interest in the influence of Orphic lore, particularly relating to the god Phanes, on later Gnosticism. For the direct links between Orphic magical traditions, Parmenides and Empedocles see APMM; IDPW 62-8, 89-94, 121-3, 132, 212-14, ENM 373-80. Empedocles and magical incantations: APMM 222, 247-8, 342; ENM 395. Parmenides and magic incantations: IDPW 119, 141, 170; G. Pugliese Carratelli in Magna Grecia, ed. Pugliese Carratelli (Milan 1988) 234-6. 8 On 3 October 1957 Aniela Jaffé triggered a spirited monologue by Jung about the very same passage in his Red book -- the Izdubar episode -- where the poison and incantations are mentioned (JP 147-8). He vividly relives the experience of being forced against his conscious will to write such ridiculous nonsense; complains bitterly about just how much this cost NOTES TO PAGES 68-70 505 him; and insists that no one could possibly understand what he had to endure. ®? For Jung's overriding fear of science see e.g. JJW 92: "I am not afraid of communism; I am afraid of unconsciousness and of modern science ... [he atom bomb is in the hands of unconscious people. It is like giving a baby a kilo of gelignite, it eventually blows itself up" (spoken in 1955). It can be disconcerting to watch how even the most reputable Jung experts assume that, whenever he describes western cultural history as culminating in "modern science', he must be telling a nice "linear narrative of history" based on an optimistic model of evolution which automatically excludes any possible "apocalyptic" ending (cf. e.g. P. Bishop, Jung's Answer to Job', Hove 2002, 132: "... although he is deeply attracted to the apocalyptic convictions of some of the texts he is analysing, ultimately he remains committed to a linear narrative of history ... 'via alchemy to modern science"). What they completely, and one could say conveniently, forget is that modern science for Jung had its own apocalyptic as well as catastrophic connotations. See e.g. PR 450-1 §§733-4 (modern science's creations "eclipse even the horrors described in the Apocalypse"), 461 §747, 463 §749, and especially the "evolutionary" picture sketched by him in Modern man in search of a soul: we as humanity are now "the disappointment of the hopes and expectations of the ages. Think of nearly two thousand years of Christian ideals followed, not by the return of the Messiah and the heavenly millennium, but by the World War among Christian nations with its barbed wire and poison gas. What a catastrophe in heaven and on earth! In the face of such a picture we may well grow humble again. It is true that modern man is a culmination, but tomorrow he will be surpassed. He is indeed the end-product of an age-old 506 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL development, but he is at the same time the worst conceivable disappointment of the hopes of mankind. The modern man is conscious of this. He has seen how beneficent are science, technology and organization, but also how catastrophic ..." (London 1933, 230; cf. C777 §§154-5). 7" On the diabolical consequences of modern science and technology see e.g. SZ 567 §1306, ironically addressing "the benevolent god of science" who has "produced the most diabolical war machinery" (spoken in 1936); PR 48 §85, "Look at the devilish engines of destruction. They are invented by completely innocuous gentlemen" (1937), M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 53 = JS 397, "The more successful we become in science and technology, the more diabolical are the uses to which we put our inventions and discoveries" (1959). TM See e.g. R.I. Evans, Jung on elementary psychology (New York 1976) 147, 217 = JS 333 ("Everyone who says I am a mystic is just an idiot"), JL ii 290, [JW 46, A. Jaffé, Was C.G. Jung a mystic? (Einsiedeln 1989) 1; M.-L. von Franz, PP 38 (1998) 15; S. Shamdasani, J// 1, 101. Freud had already worked hard to make Jung sensitive to the slightest accusation of being a mystic. See his letter to him dated 12 May 1911 about "dem Schimpf 'Mystiker", the ultimate insult of being called a mystic (FJ 466 §255F), as well as his letters to Alphonse Maeder dated 21 September 1913 (Schweizerische Zeitschrift fur Psychologie 15, 1956, 117) and to Ernest Jones dated 19 May 1921 (The complete correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Ernest Jones, 1908-1939, ed. R.A. Paskauskas, Cambridge, MA 1993, 424). Last, but not least, see Jung himself: [7P 25 and FP 339 §781, where he humorously sticks the label of "mystic" back onto Freud. NOTES TO PAGES 70-72 507 72 Letter written in 1926 and, as Gerhard Adler calmly notes, "not published in the selections now available": PP 6 (1975) 12. For the common knowledge during Jung's lifetime that he kept his mystical side a secret, note e.g. Paul Brunton's record of the time Jung privately admitted to him in his home at Kusnacht "that he kept his mystical belief and experience secret in order to preserve his scientific reputation" (Reflections on my life and writings = The notebooks of Paul Brunton viii, Burdett, NY 1987, 214; for Brunton's visit cf. JZ i 236 n.); and compare the similar admissions by colleagues and family as recorded in The fountain of the love of wisdom, ed. E. Kennedy -- Xypolitas (Wilmette 2006) 318 (von Franz), 321 (Jung's son Franz). "People nowadays ... defective understanding": C.G. Jung, Symboltk des Geistes (Zurich 1948) 422-3, cf. PR 184 §274; and compare the wording of his letter to J.B. Rhine in 1935 (JZ i 190). 73 See already the opening paragraph of the Red 500k where the spirit of the depths is introduced as possessing a "greater power", throughout all time, than the spirit of this time (RB 229b: "héhere Macht"); RB 233b (the spirit of the depths surpasses and dominates the spirit of this time, which in comparison is ineffective and invalid), 239 n.91. For no. 2 personality as far more valid and powerful than no. 1 see especially Jung's crucial explanation at JP 302 of how, while no. 1 personality keeps rushing towards one thing or craving another, no. 2 will say something altogether different but that's what matters ("aber das gilt"); and while anybody identifying with personality no. 1 is bound to be haunted by constant feelings of uncertainty due to living in an unpredictable and relative world, what counts ("was gilt") is the world of no. 2. Mark Saban is only very partly correct in claiming that, of Jung's two personalities, "neither is more 'real' nor more 508 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL fundamental than the other", and from a practical point of view he is altogether wrong in denying that Jung considered personality no. 1 "in any way inferior or subservient to personality No. 2" (How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and M. Stein, Hove 2013, 20-1). Significantly, just as with Jung, the story is the same with Empedocles: the hidden principle of Strife, his spirit of the depths, is what will ultimately always have the final word on every level by returning each part of existence to its primordial nature or "root" (ENM 384-6, 392-4; Reality 347-453). For Jung's fiery denunciation of Freudian rationalism, in particular, as a "bastard of a science" because it's simply a very respectable attempt at "blocking off and protecting oneself" from the huge dangers of making the journey into the unconscious see JB i 185 (cf. JL i 141). Note here, in the contrast he draws between the illegitimacy of modern rational science and the journey of medieval knights on their sacred quest, his obvious allusion to the legends of the Grail. For the genealogy of his vivid bastard imagery see the opening to Otto Rank's famous June 1924 lecture at the University of Pennsylvania (A psychology of difference, Princeton 1996, 51-2; EJ. Lieberman, Acts of will, New York 1985, xxvii). * "Rather, it is the solution ...": P. Bishop, Carl Jung (London 2014) 15. And compare 8. Shamdasani's tentative comment, referring to the episode in the Red book where western science is described as a poison that has to be counteracted by incantations: "Jung tries to construct a new science that will no longer wound or lame Izdubar. He's trying to construct a new science that redeems or provides new access to the ancient" ( JAP 57, 2012, 375). NOTES TO PAGES 72-75 509 76 See Jung's classic comments on the role of "primordial experience" in art: SM 90-8 §§141 -- -52; and for his own, inner experience of returning to the "primordial beginning" see RB 247a, 251a. The fashionable attempt to reduce him to a "textual Jung", conveniently cutting away the raw dimension of experience from his life and work, is made by P. Bishop: Carl Jung (London 2014) 18-21. But Sonu Shamdasani too -- aside from his gratuitous and irrelevant mention of a "primal scream' -- sadly shows how little he understands of Jung when he claims that in the "depths, we do not find pure experience as such, no 'primal scream', but biblical and classical figures" (C.G. Jung: a biography in books, New York 2012, 100). If only he had read carefully the passage from Jung that he himself cites, he would have found him saying just the opposite: "the primordial experience ... is so dark and amorphous that it requires the related mythological imagery to give it form. In itself it is wordless and imageless ... It is nothing but a tremendous intuition striving for expression. It is like a whirlwind that seizes everything within reach and assumes visible form as it swirls upward ..." (SM 96-7 §151, cf. 91-2 §143). For the process of discovering the words and the imagery needed to convey a primordial experience of the depths see also Red book, folio i verso (poorly translated at RB 230b) with PSIE 231. TM On the word phystkos, its particular meanings and applications, see Marcel Mauss' simple but elegant comments in A general theory of magic (London 1972) 143; A. Dieterich, Abraxas (Leipzig 1891) 51 n.2 (a book unique in its importance for Jung: RB 349 n.93); APMM 229, IDPW 140-6 (for the significance of Parmenides being called physikos) with the detailed bibliography on the word at 248. For Jung's repeated, and emphatic, declaration that his own interests were purely 510 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL empirical as opposed to metaphysical -- 'I observe, | classify, I establish relations and sequences between the observed data" (JL ii 567) -- see e.g. B. Hannah, Jung, his life and work (New York 1976) 78, S. Shamdasani, JM 99. No one in this connection stops to consider that, for centuries and millennia, those experts who specialized in empirical as opposed to metaphysical issues were traditionally the magicians (Mauss 139-44; APMM 227-32). 8 Aniela Jaffé had initially wanted her biography of Jung to start with him explaining how much he valued repetition because "My thinking is circular; I circle around questions repeatedly. That method is congenial to me ...". But, as Shamdasani has noted, the passage was omitted and this means "something rather central to Jung's self-understanding landed up on the cutting floor" (Spring 57, 1995, 124, referring to MDRC vy). For the German original of Jung's comments here on repetition and circularity see JP 260/275; and for Jung on the importance of "circular thinking" especially in Gnostic or alchemical tradition compare e.g. PR 96 n.59, AS 84 §§110-11, MC 102 §123 with n.54. ") Repetition and circularity in the writings of Parmenides and Empedocles: Parmenides fr. 3 Diels = fr. 12 Gemelli Marciano; Empedocles frs. 24 -- 5 Diels; J.P. Hershbell, Classical journal 63 (1968) 351-7; L. Ballew, Phronesis 19 (1974) 190-6; D.W. Graham, Classical quarterly 38 (1988) 305; G.M. De Rubeis, Studi classici e orientali 41 (1991) 87-93; ENM 334 with n.2, 358-9, 363, 370-1. On their underlying role and function see IDPW 118-27, 246, ENM 379-80 with n.111, Reality 34-6; L. Gemelli Marciano, Ancient philosophy 28 (2008) 32-45 and PSIE 58-9, 71-103, 267-70; also M. Detienne and J.-P. NOTES TO PAGES 75-76 511 Vernant, Les ruses de l'intelligence (Paris 1974) 51-6, 261-304 with J.M. Rahm, Deconstructing the western worldview (PhD thesis, University of Alaska Fairbanks 2014) 12, 26, 44, 62, 86, 118. For scholars' brutish impatience with repetition as used, especially, by Parmenides cf. H. Diels, Parmenides: Lehrgedicht (Berlin 1897) 23 -- 5 ("careless ... naive ... amateurish"), A.P.D. Mourelatos, The route of Parmenides (2° ed., Las Vegas 2008) 35 ("almost puerile ... awkward and pointless ... expressive failure"); and on repetition's altogether unhealthy associations with "archaic thought" see B.A. van Groningen, Mnemosyne 24 (1971) 179. Parmenides as a iatromantis: IDPW 101-230; and for the healing power of a iatromantis' words cf. e.g. euékea baxin at Empedocles fr. 112.11 Diels = fr. 157.16 Gemelli Marciano with APMM 220 n.7. One other aspect of repetition which may become familiar to readers of this book is the ancient habit of touching on a theme or subject very briefly to begin with, only to return to it later -- each time filling in more of the missing details and helping to make the implicit just a little bit more explicit (Diels, Parmenides 22-4, ENM 371). 80 See especially his letter to Zwi Werblowsky dated 17 June 1952 (JL ii 69-71); also RB 244b with n.142, 268-70, 302 n.211, AS 162-3 §199, PA 15-16 §18. With characteristic earthiness Jung emphasizes that real ambiguity involves far more than verbal games -- note his comment in the Red book on how easy it is to play at ambiguity, but how hard to live it (RB 244b) -- although of course his warning has done nothing whatsoever to stop modern Jungians from engaging in the soulless mental gymnastics of post-structuralist "indeterminacy" (M. Saban in How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and M. Stein, Hove 2013, 6-25). 512 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL 8! Gerhard Adler, for example, cites the words Jung wrote to Werblowsky about ambiguity in June 1952 simply so that he can distinguish his attitude from the "clear, systematic, technical way of thinking" of Freud (Selected letters of C.G. Jung, Princeton 1984, vii -- viii) -- as if the significance of Jung's writing style can only be grasped in the context of a relationship ended forty years earlier. Otherwise there is more than a little tension between Jung's own emphasis on the crucial importance of ambiguity and the predictable rush by Jungians, especially in North America, to make his message as clear and plain and simple to digest as possible. No one stops to ponder the dangers posed by Edward Edinger's altogether commendable efforts ("Many people compare his writings to those of Jung but find him much easier to read") to strip Jung's ideas of their ambiguities and transform them into something "more accessible to the general reader", "easier to grasp" (T.B. Kirsch, The Jungians, London 2000, 71, 101). And meanwhile Jung's explicit statements about the vital need for ambiguity are conveniently forgotten by scholars so that they can turn back undisturbed to their task of criticizing him for the confused, murky, nebulous and unsystematic nature of his writing (so e.g. P. Bishop, Jung's Answer to Job', Hove 2002, 132; R. Main, The rupture of time, Hove 2004; J. Mills, I//S 5, 2013, 19-43). ®2 For intentional ambiguity in Presocratic philosophy see e.g. P. Merlan, Kleine philosophische Schriften (Hildesheim 1976) 4-5; APMM and ENM 362-81; G. Costa in Linguistica é storia, ed. S. Marchesini and P. Poccetti (Pisa 2003) 73 and Ainigma e griphos, ed. S. Monda (Pisa 2012) 56-68. On unsolvable riddles, ambiguity and initiation into the mysteries of the underworld cf. IDPW; ENM 378. This is of course worlds apart from the mentality of most later Platonists, who NOTES TO PAGES 76~ -- 78 513 spent their time "ferreting out" the ambiguities of much older philosophers and claiming to be able to unravel them in the brilliant light of reasoning (J.M. Dillon and W. Polleichtner, lamblichus of Chalcis: The letters, Atlanta 2009, 14-15, 70). "Avoid ambiguity! ...": Aristotle, RAetoric 1407a32-7 (abbreviated); cf. H. Diels, Kleine Schriften zur Geschichte der antiken Philosophie (Hildesheim 1969) 177 with n.3, APMM 43-4 and ENM 370 n.85. The passage is, naturally, very valuable in showing that ambiguity as well as repetition was linked with circularity. For Empedocles as prophet and iatromantis see especially frs. 112.10 -- 11 and 146 Diels = frs. 157.15-16 and 184 Gemelli Marciano with APMM 220 n.7, 344-5, 382-3, IDPW 206-7 and ENM 343 with n.19, 380, plus e.g. M. Garani, Empedocles redivivus (New York 2007) 3 -- 4. In deciding to question whether Empedocles considered himself a prophet, M.A. Flower (The seer in ancient Greece, Berkeley 2008, 81 n.23) inexplicably forgets to read the texts he himself refers to (mantosunai belong by definition to a mantis). Far more reliable guidance is offered by James Olney, who astutely bestows the title of iatromantis on both Empedocles and Jung: The rhizome and the flower (Berkeley 1980) 155-7. 83 On the quintessential role of ambiguity in Parmenides' logic see Reality 15-306, 401, 565, 577 with ENM 369-81. Jung on "this petty reasoning mind, which cannot endure any paradoxes": PA 16 §19. It should be remembered that Jung specifically praised the "ancients" for their mastery of ambiguity and multiple meanings (RBu 244 n.144, cf. RB 244 n.143). 84 Jung on the "so-called autobiography": JZ ii 550; D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 606, 639-40; S. Shamdasani, JSB 35. And for Jung's protests at the "auntification" of his own words 514 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL see A.C. Elms, Uncovering lives (New York 1994) 51-70; Shamdasani, Spring 57 (1995) 129-31; Bair 611-15, 632-6. With regard to the still unpublished Protocols, Jung's secretary and editor Aniela Jaffé would later go out of her way to deny that they correspond exactly or word for word to what he himself had said while being questioned and interviewed by her: see her letter of 26 November 1981 to William McGuire as well as her covering letter to the Library of Congress dated October 1983, both filed on open access with the library's copy of the Protocols. But one has to realize that she had the strongest legal reasons for asserting at least some degree of creativity in producing them because -- throughout her extended battle with Jung's family to claim copyright of this original autobiographical material for herself -- she had to maximize in every possible way the importance and extent of her own contributions while paradoxically minimizing the extent and importance of his. This is not even to mention the psychological difficulties she clearly ran into through her work on Jung's biography, suffering a "gigantic inflation of the ego" and ending up as confused as "a hypnotized bunny" (Bair 599, 606). At any rate her later reminiscence, in the letter to McGuire, of how Jung had talked to her by following a kind of "Freudian line of associations" (cf. Shamdasani, Spring 57, 1995, 123) agrees down to the smallest detail with what one still finds in the Protocols; and there is Ximena de Angulo Roelli's significant comment, too, that reading them for the first time was just like hearing Jung himself talk again. In fact, as she notes, his characteristic rhythms are so intact that Jaffé must have been extremely accurate and careful in preserving what he had said (letter to William McGuire dated 1 October 1979, held in the same files). NOTES TO PAGES 78-82 515 85 JP 147. For Jung's method of free association here in replying to Aniela Jaffé's question, see her letter to William McGuire dated 26 November 1981 (Library of Congress); S. Shamdasani, Spring 57 (1995) 123-4. °6 Note, for example, how the enormous metallic volumes containing the entirety of Jung's knowledge are presented to him not by the spirit of the depths -- but by the spirit of his time. See Red book, folio i verso (RB 230b); and compare folio ii verso (RB 233b) on all learning and scholarly erudition belonging, by definition, to the spirit of this time. *" For a fine recent discussion of Jung's "ordering mind", and its role in converting the chaotic contents of the unconscious into their opposite, see M. Stein, Minding the self (Hove 2014) 64- 75. Stein's study also has the virtue of showing how easy it can be to choose between opposing perspectives when explaining what happened to Jung during his period of descent into the underworld. Very humanly Stein describes how Jung "decided to follow what he called 'the Spirit of the Depths" (66), even though Jung himself explains that he never had any choice in the matter at all (cf. e.g. JP 145, 173). Or as he says right at the start of the Red book, he has "no choice" because the spirit of the depths "forces ... possesses a greater power ... subjugated ... took away ... robbed ... forced ... took ..." (RB 229b) -- in just the same way that Parmenides emphasizes right at the start of his own account how he was irresistibly taken into the underworld, "carried ... carried ... carried ..." (Parmenides fr. 1.1 -- 4 Diels = fr. 8A.7-10 Gemelli Marciano; [DPW 53-4, 119-20, ENM 370-9, Reality 26-7, 34-6, SW 90, 103-7). All due respect and acknowledgement absolutely have to be 516 ONE !: MYSTICAL FOOL paid to Jung's classic statement that "a real settlement with the unconscious demands a firmly opposed conscious standpoint" (TE 213 §342), although in reality there are various different levels involved. And when (e.g. JP 169) he warns against overvaluing the unconscious he is referring, very specifically, to the dangers of identifying with it or being devoured by it. 88 The crucial sentence here in the Protocols is "Das ist die Leidenschaft, die in diesem Feuer lag, dieser Lavastrom, der hat's erzwungen und alles hat sich dann ganz natiirlicherweise eingeordnet" (JP 149; Jaffé had started typing the words "was ich dann" after "und alles" and before "hat sich dann", but crossed them out). Jaffé has completely missed the point of this sentence in rewriting it for the published German version of Jung's biography ("und die Leidenschaft, die in seinem Feuer lag, hat mein Leben umgeformt und angeordnet", ETG 203), while the English version only carries her misunderstanding a step further: "and the heat of its fires reshaped my life" (W@DR 190/199, cf. MDRC 145). Of course these are beautifully inspiring new -- age sentiments; but they are not what Jung had meant, or said. Otherwise, comparing this page of the Protocols with the corresponding pages of the published German or English biographies offers a valuable insight into Aniela Jaffé's working method. She inverts the order and sequence of more or less every single sentence, almost systematically reversing Jung's own flow. Also -- a major exhibit for anyone studying the arts of mistranslation -- she replaces Jung's mention of his initial wish to bring the seething material of the unconscious together into a coherent and orderly world ("in eine Welt einzuordnen': clearly he meant "world" here in the ancient Greek sense of an ordered osmos) with the altogether different idea that he had wanted to incorporate it NOTES TO PAGES 82-85 517 "into the contemporary picture of the world" (MDR 190/199, cf. JP 144, 169). And she personalizes what for Jung was a statement of principle, that out of the fiery lava emerges solid stone and then out of the solid stone it becomes possible to create something, by replacing it with the simple declaration that he himself was able to work on the stone (this sentence has been struck out of the English text). With regard to Jung's principle, and how it actually works for someone who stays conscious of all three phases during this process of creating something out of stone, we have his own account of what happened when he worked on carving the famous stone at Bollingen. First he became aware that the stone was looking at him; and from then on, in the inscriptions he carved, he just allowed the stone to speak (MDR 214-16/226-8; cf. JL ii 290: without thinking "I just brought into shape what I saw on its face"). On the other hand, regarding the destructive effects of Jaffé's often arbitrary and chaotic method in reworking for publication the original statements made by Jung, see already S. Shamdasani, JAP 45 (2000) 465-6 and JSB 29; D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 778 n.87. 8? "Ich wollte etwas leisten in meiner Wissenschaft und bin dann auf diesen Lavastrom gestossen, und der hat dann alles angeordnet" (JP 149); Jung expresses himself in more conventional language at JP 177, RB 190/360. The mistranslation is Shamdasani's (JM 22), who ironically on the very same page -- as often elsewhere -- criticizes the English Collected works for the shoddy quality of their translations from Jung's German. ° For Parmenides, illusions and deceptions, his role as prophet along with the game of being human, and the manipulations 518 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL as well as mistranslations of his words, see Reality 9-306. Well worth mentioning in this context is the process by which the goddess' original demand that Parmenides should yield, without a moment's doubt or hesitation, to the irresistible force of her persuasion became corrupted into the philosophically far more acceptable command to "judge for yourself by reason" -- even though this corrupted version of the text is impossible to justify on any rational or philological grounds. But, as usual, scholars will still go to the most ridiculously irrational lengths in the effort to support their rationalistic misreadings. See Reality 117-44, 566-9; PSIE 84-90, 215-29; and for similar examples of specialists falsifying ancient texts and other evidence in the name of some spurious "rationality", repeating their predecessors' flagrant mistakes from century to century simply because they are unable to face what that ancient evidence was wanting to say, compare e.g. ENM 353-6, 399-401. 91 TP 174 (12 October 1957). Shamdasani mentions this fear of being torn apart, very misleadingly, right at the end of a paragraph about Jung's "problem of what to do with Toni Wolff' -- implying to any casual reader that it stemmed from the internal conflicts and tensions in their relationship (Spring 57, 1995, 125). But Jung makes it perfectly clear that what he is afraid of is of being torn apart by the overwhelming power of the many archetypal forces or voices, such as Philemon, who are rising up and speaking through him: in other words, the various beings who appear throughout the Red book. See especially JP 144-5 and 174-5 (Philemon); also Cary de Angulo's draft letter to Jung dated 30 January 1924, recording how Jung told her he had been "very nearly torn asunder" in the battle between the world of physical reality and the world NOTES TO PAGES 85-86 519 of spirit (RB 213b; CBA). As for Toni Wolff: at this stage, with her "bird-fluttering", she was little more than a helpless and disoriented bystander who was unable to guide or reassure him in any meaningful way (draft letter from de Angulo to Jung dated 26 January 1924: RB 213b, CBA; cf. JP 171-4). Well worth noting, in this context, is Jung's own association of lava imagery with insanity: JV i 594 -- 5; compare also Virginia Woolf's "Madness is terrific I can assure you ... and in its lava I still find most of the things I write about" (The letters of Virginia Woolf iv, ed. N. Nicolson, London 1978, 180; C. MacKenna in Insanity and divinity, ed. J. Gale, M. Robson and G. Rapsomatioti, Hove 2014, 72). 92 ".. Aber es war eine damonische Kraft in mir": JP 174. The sentence, as well as Jung's immediate thought process, ends abruptly here. Once again, Aniela Jaffé shows her true colours in the version she helps to cook up for the published biography (ETG 180; MDR 171/177). Naturally she leaves out any mention of Jung clinging to tables. From elsewhere she introduces comparisons to Nietzsche and Hédlderlin (cf. e.g. JP 149, 227), shifting onto a literary and philosophical level his grimly raw account of the day-to-day struggle for sheer survival. Then she becomes Jung's cheerleader-in-chief, replacing his statements of fear and terror with the bold assertion that he had never entertained a single doubt; has him affirm his "unswerving conviction that I was obeying a higher will" which offers a notable contrast to his own confession that everything for him had seemed impossible until, immersed in a horrific darkness, he realized his only hope was to obey a higher will and endure even though he didn't understand one single thing (JP 171); and ends her paragraph with his dramatic celebration that he "had mastered the task", "der 520 ONE ! MYSTICAL FOOL Bewaltigung der Aufgabe", which is something Jung himself at the time considered unachievable ("die ich selber nicht bewaltigen konnte", JP 149). But none of this comes even close to the way in which she inserts a comma right at the end of Jung's crucial statement that "there was a daimonic power in me", before making him go straight on to add "and from the beginning there was no doubt in my mind that I must find the meaning of what I was experiencing in these fantasies" (cf. JP 175 ) -- demonstrating with her busy "improvements" that she didn't have a clue what Jung had meant by daimonic power. In fine collegial spirit Gerhard Adler praises Aniela Jaffé for "her complete grasp" of Jung's theoretical ideas (JL i and ii xviii); but predictably he says nothing about her far-from-complete grasp of the realities behind those ideas. 3 See for this MDR 181-2/189 and JP 226-7. Of course not many of us will want to consider in any depth what the snapshot of a man who has to recite his own address just to convince himself that he exists, or the fact of having a wife and five children, really tells us about his state of mind at the time. It will be noted that, although Jung refers throughout the whole passage to his family alone, three times this has been changed by his editors and publishers to "my family and my professional work" or "my family and my profession". Aside from that, calling his family a "joyful reality" in the English version of his biography (MDR 182/189, repeated by Shamdasani: Lament of the dead, New York 2013, 72) is not only rather too strong a translation of Jung's own "begliickende Realitat" but is hardly a true description of his family life at the time (VZ 100-1, 110). "4 This explanatory stance is best exemplified nowadays by the discussion held between Sonu Shamdasani and James NOTES TO PAGES 86-88 521 Hillman: Lament of the dead (New York 2013) 69-72. Of course it has been aided immensely by the heroic spin Aniela Jaffé introduced into the published biography. 5 See for example Jung's letter to Michael Fordham dated 18 April 1946 and published now in JSB 48-9. %6 The classic definitions of daimonios offered by S. Tromp de Ruiter are still a good starting-point for understanding the daimonic in Homer: De vocis quae est 'Daimén' apud Homerum significatione atque usu (Amsterdam 1918) 169 ("whoever is led or carried along by some divine or numinous power ... and whose character and abilities exceed the limits of humanity due to the working of an occult power"), 169 n.1 ("only as a result of divine influence", ""Daimonic', ever since the time of Homer, means any individual who seems to draw on an inexplicable source and every influence which is experienced as superhuman'), 171 ("not of one's own will but due to a certain hidden power"). The daimonic in Parmenides: O. Gilbert, Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie 20 (1907) 25-45 with ENM 370-1. In Empedocles: M. Detienne, La notion de 'daimén' dans le pythagorisme ancien (Paris 1963) with W. Burkert, Gnomon 36 (1964) 563-7; L. Gemelli Marciano, Aevum antiquum 1 (2001) 205-35; Reality 358-65. In Aristotle: PJ. van der Eijk, Medicine and philosophy in classical antiquity (Cambridge 2005) 145 n.27 ("The 'daemonic' ... consists in the fact that it escapes rational control"), 191-2 ("beyond human control', the opposite, so to speak, of 'human'"), 247 n.30. In Freud: D. Kalsched, The inner world of trauma (Hove 1996). For the daimonic in Jung see RB 264b (the daimonic lies beyond all the pretty appearances of our visible world), JV i 257, JL i 344 (defining it as "an unconscious content of seemingly overwhelming power" linked 522 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL to "possession") and ii 487 ("compelling"; ever since "ancient times" it has been understood that "no amount of reason can conjure" it magically away), 531-2 ("To hell with the Ego -- world!"), MDR 328/356 ("There was a daimon in me ... it overpowered me") and 387-9 = RB 352-3. On the daimonic inheritance, the mysterious nature that Jung inherited from his mother in all its primordial ruthlessness and power, see MDR 59-60/50 with J. Sherry, Car] Gustav Jung: avant-garde conservative (New York 2010) 19; and contrast James Hillman's predictably kitsch rendering of Jung's "daimonic inheritance" for the American spirit of our time (Sphinx 1, 1988, 9-19). *7 Compare especially MC 350 §493, where Jung cites the Latin version of the saying -- vatura naturam vincit -- in describing the primordial "conflict of opposites" that acts itself out when the adept is "drawn involuntarily into the drama" of the unconscious as the direct result of a katabasis, or descent into the underworld. See also ibid. 29 n.152, 79 §86, 264 n.23; AS 77 §102, 161 §198, 321 §426; PPT 262 §469; ACU 130 §234; Aion 159 §244. Basic references for the original Greek saying are Physici et medici graeci minores, ed. \.L. Ideler ii (Berlin 1842) 214.15-215.14; Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs, ed. M. Berthelot (Texte grec, Paris 1887-88) 20.6, 43.20- 1, 57.14-15; H. Diels, Antike Technik (2"4 ed., Leipzig 1920) 131 and Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, ed. Diels and W. Kranz, ii (6 ed., Berlin 1952) 219.20-1; J. Bidez and F. Cumont, Les mages hellénisés (Paris 1938) i 203-4, 244-6, ii 313-21; A.-J. Festugiére, La révélation d'Hermés Trismégiste i (2TM ed., Paris 1950) 228-37, 433-4; J.P. Hershbell, Amdix 34 (1987) 12-14 = Alchemy and early modern chemistry, ed. A.G. Debus (London 2004) 70-2; M. Martelli, The 'four books' of pseudo-Democritus (Leeds 2013). NOTES TO PAGES 88-90 523 8 See e.g. Jung's comments to Miguel Serrano in May 1959 about someone who "worked with me for a while, but he was unable to follow through to the end. The path is very difficult ..." (C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse, London 1966, 61); or to Esther Harding in May 1960, "People may have to go back to the Church when they reach a certain stage of analysis. Individuation is only for the few ..." (Quadrant 8/2, Winter 1975, 17). "The strongest and best ... the maternal abyss": TE 169-70 §261 = 287 §477. " With the "damonische Kraft" at JP 174 compare especially the "urspriinglichen und darum damonisch wirkenden Kraft" of the medieval magician, Psychologische Typen (17" ed., Solothurn 1994) 197 §316; cf. 219 §347 and 239 §383 ("als damonischer Machte ... als Zauber, als mit magischer Kraft geladen"). For the intimate connection between the "daimonic" and magic see also RB 240b; TE 96-7 §§153-5; JL ii 82. The idea of a special magical, or non-human, power accessible to certain humans is one of the main themes that drew Jung to ancient Gnosticism: note e.g. his deliberate underlining of the word "Kraft" in the copy he owned of Hans Leisegang's Die Gnosis, at the point where Leisegang is explaining the extraordinary powers of Simon Magus (Leipzig 1924, 61). And note, too, Jung's dramatic description of the magician as a being of pure mystery who is "superior in strength to all men" ("an Starke allen Mannern tiberlegen"): RB 328-9. Of course the mistake of rendering "damonische Kraft" as "demonic strength" in the published English version of his biography (MDR 171/177: contrast the original and more accurate rendering at MMDRC 120) is, considering all the modern nuances of the word "demonic", an even worse distortion of what Jung had meant by these words; but the verbal landscape 524 ONE : MYSTICAL FOOL has already been so scarred and disfigured here that a bit more damage makes little difference. 100 C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 82, 61, 64. NOTES TO PART TWO 1 See Walter Odajnyk's finely perceptive comments on how -- in service to the spirit of the depths and also in a movement directly parallel to the traditional withdrawal of mystics into monasteries or deserts -- Jung himself "would have to withdraw into the desert, into a monastery. In time, Jung's need for a withdrawal from the world so as to nurture the terrible secret he carried was realized with the construction of his hermitage at Bollingen" (PP 53, 2010, 450-1). It will be noted, too, that the highly unusual living arrangements which were to make such a powerful impression on Jung as a child when he visited the hermitage of the famous Swiss mystic Brother Klaus or Nicholas of Flite were also the first and most obvious inspiration for the living arrangements he would later recreate at Bollingen. What a good idea, Jung was already thinking as a young boy, to have one's family in one house and live the life of a saintly hermit in another building which would be somewhat distant but not too far away -- "with a pile of books, and a table for writing, and an open fire ..." (ETG 84; cf. MDR 84-5/78- 9). ? Bollingen as Jung's "tiny private psycho -- Disneyland": Wolfgang Giegerich, //7P 6/1 (2004) 48, reiterated years later 526 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE by his claim that in reality Bollingen for Jung was nothing but a false "simulation" or "cloud-cuckoo-land" (Z//S& 4, 2012, 14-15). For the hollowness of Giegerich's theorizing see, aside from his own writings, Sophia Heller's The absence of myth (Albany 2006); and for a pithy reply to Giegerich, Murray Stein's comments in Initiation, ed. T. Kirsch, V.B. Rutter and T. Singer (Hove 2007) 87-91. There are few greater ironies than Giegerich's own failure to realize that the imaginary "logic" on which he bases his entire posturing -- the narrative of an evolutionary push from mythos into /ogos, from myth into rationality -- is itself an outdated myth which has become completely obsolete. See e.g. 4APMM with G.W. Most in From myth to reason?, ed. R. Buxton (Oxford 1999) 25-47. "The ten thousand worthless things ...": Empedocles fr. 110.6 -- 7 Diels = fr. 156.8-9 Gemelli Marciano; ENM 353. $"Too many people live with an image ..." and "fantasy relationships": Gerhard Adler in JSB 65. Only after speaking at Eranos did I come across my notebook from 1985 containing the full details exactly as I had recorded them. Needless to say, in describing what happened on that night I have absolutely no intention of condoning -- let alone encouraging -- trespassers. Even Jung himself had more than enough trouble with unwanted visitors at Bollingen while he was still alive (D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 324). But it seems that whoever, or whatever, wanted me there had some very different concerns. * JP 308-9. The published biography does allow Jung to mention twice, in passing, the dream image of a knight (MDR 160-1/164 -- 5, 167/172-3). But here, in the unpublished Protocols, he brings both of those dream occurrences together during the course of an extended commentary on that very same dream about his search for the Grail which -- NOTES TO PAGES 103-104 527 uncoincidentally -- we soon will come to. In the process of doing so, he explains that this dream figure of the knight represents his own ancient forefather or ancestor; describes how the Grail is a reward for living the life of a true knight and how one can only set off in quest of the Grail after inwardly being accepted as abiding by the rules for becoming a knight; and emphasizes in no uncertain terms that the mysterious gift of the Grail received by a knight is the deepest secret possible for a human which is the true secret, or mystery, of individuation. Neither is there anything coincidental about the fact that the archetypal figure of the knight, along with the equally archetypal rules of chivalry bound up with traditions surrounding the Grail, were also of the most fundamental importance for Henry Corbin in both his life and his work. See e.g. Face de Dieu, face de 'homme (Paris 1983) 31, 208-31; EJ 39 (1970) 87 with nn.32-3, 92, 140; ibid., 40 (1971) 311-56 with IDPW 217-19, EIT iv 178, 390-460; Corbin and M. Sarraf, Thaités des compagnons -- chevaliers (Tehran 1973); Cahiers de Université Saint Jean de Jérusalem 1 (1974) 8-9, 25-51 with R. de Chateaubriant, ibid. 13-23, 5 (1978) 166-9, and C. Jambet, ibid. 10 (1983) 49-67; R. Bosnak, SF/I 7/1 (Winter 1987) 26. As a matter of fact one could say that the entire encounter and friendship between Corbin and Jung was governed by their ancestral values of chivalry, about which most people nowadays who try to discuss Jung's relationship with Corbin sadly no longer have the remotest understanding. > For the inscription Quaero quod impossibile at Bollingen see the unique report by Fowler McCormick in Car! Gustav Jung, 1875-1961: a memorial meeting (New York 1962) 13, who rightly calls attention to its "challenging words", also MH 1:16:05-22. About the forgotten art of working with the impossible I already wrote a little treatise several years ago 528 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE (SW). Interestingly, the identical Latin saying is quoted by Victor White in a letter he wrote to Jung during June 1948 (JW 125). White's mention here of this very same saying, which is unattested anywhere in classical Latin literature, implies that he had come face to face with the carved inscription during one of his earliest visits -- he was first invited in 1946 -- to Jung's retreat at Bollingen. There is an obvious and fundamental contrast between "I seek the impossible" and the famous statement Credo quia impossibile, "I believe because it's impossible", often attributed to Tertullian although in fact just a popular paraphrase of 'Tertullian's own words at On the flesh of Christ 5.4. This is why White in his letter quotes the two Latin sayings together, Credo quia impossibile as summarizing the attitude of Pistis or belief and Quaero quod impossibile as embodying the attitude of Gnosis or the thirst for direct knowledge. This, also, is why Father White has just stated in the same paragraph how profoundly moved he was by Jung's definition of his own lifework as "essentially an attempt to understand what others apparently can believe" (JW 125; cf. ibid. 119 = JZ i 502 and e.g. PA 15-17 §§18-19). In his eyes Jung would always be, whether for better or worse, a perfect spokesperson for the way of the Gnostic. ° As for what lies behind the Latin saying that Jung chose to inscribe above his fireplace at Bollingen, I am deeply grateful to Jung's grandson Ulrich Hoerni who has pointed me to its obvious source of inspiration. In Goethe's play, Faust is encouraged by the prophet Manto to descend into the underworld to meet Persephone herself with these words: "Den lieb' ich, der Unmogliches begehrt", "Him I love, who seeks the impossible" (Faust 2.7488; these words have, indeed, been specially underlined by Jung in his personal reading copy of Faust: Goethes Faust, ed. H.G. Graf, Leipzig 1913, NOTES TO PAGES 104-105 529 353). Manto, daughter of Asclepius and greatest of healer -- prophets, then continues (and Jung has marked these words, too, in his text): "Enter, bold spirit! Joy will be yours! The dark passage leads to Persephone who ... lurks waiting for the secret, forbidden greeting. Here I once smuggled Orpheus in ...". Meanwhile, just outside the tower, the bottom of the inscription I had been leaning against directly quotes Homer's words about being led by Hermes past the gates of the sun and the land of dreams into the underworld (Odyssey 24.12). Even the lake beside which Jung built his tower was intimately associated, in his mind, with the Homeric portrayal of journeying into the world of the dead (ETG 103-4); he was perfectly explicit about the direct connections between the Bollingen tower itself and the world of the dead (MDR 213-24/225-37: cf. T. Ziolkowski, The view from the tower, Princeton 1998, 144); and just before he died he dreamed that he was going to live in an "other", otherworldly, Bollingen (B. Hannah, Jung, his life and work, New York 1976, 344), I have devoted a book (4PMM., cf. IDPW) to the ancient Greek idea of sacred places as points of access to the underworld. ""No one, not even those closest to him ...": Cary Baynes in JSB 64; for the sentiment cf. 39-42. Just how intimate and important a role Cary Baynes had played as Jung's confidante is shown by the ease with which he spoke to her about things his own lover and supposed source of inspiration, Toni Wolff, was unable or unwilling to understand (draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 26 January 1924, CBA; cf. ibid., 13 February 1924; RB 213-14). On Jung as not able even to understand himself because he remained a total mystery to himself, see especially the famous closing words in his published biography: MDR 329-30/358-9. The frequent remarks he makes, whenever he has an opportunity, about 530 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE the abysmal inferiority of his "dull conscious mind" (letter to Henry Murray dated 2 May 1925, Papers of Henry A. Murray, Harvard University Archives; cf. JL i 42, RB 215a) are comments that should always be taken seriously. ® For Jung's axiomatic concern with the individual see e.g. TE 3-5; CT 148-9 §315 and 153-4 §§326- -- 9 with ibid. 247-305 = The undiscovered self (London 1958); SZ 609 §1392 with 261 §599; JL ii 461-2; and the programmatic statement about his whole life being devoted to the goal of finding a way to penetrate the "secret of the personality" (DR 197/206, JP 14). Wolfgang Giegerich comments on some of these passages but, with his brittle rationalism, draws the strangest conclusions (J/TP 6/1, 2004, 39-40). ' For some general observations see Aniela Jaffé, From the life and work of C.G. Jung (2° ed., Einsiedeln 1989) 132-3; NL 120-2, 157-8; P. Pietikainen, Alchemists of human nature (London 2007) 124-5. For Emma Jung's protest to her husband, that "you are not interested in anybody unless they exhibit archetypes", see M. Fordham, The making of an analyst (London 1993) 117; W. Colman, JAP 47 (2002) 493. And for Jung's own comments on the matter see especially MMDR 328- 9/356-8; also JL i 49, JV'i 7. "The moment I'd seen through them ...": ETG 359, cf. MDR 328/357. " For Jung on "the spiritual and moral darkness of State absolutism" see especially The undiscovered self (London 1958) 2 = C''T 247 §488; and R. Main, The rupture of time (Hove 2004) 120, who takes note of Jung's concern that the most vulnerable country in this regard is America. On Lucifer as "the father of lies ..." see AS 250 §303 and, for Jung's intense sensitivity -- NOTES TO PAGES 105-109 531 unmatched by many supposedly conscious people nowadays -- to the powers of propaganda or mass suggestion, SL 605 §1386, 609-10 §§1392-3, JM 340-4. 11 On the Red book as a template for Jung's developed understanding of "individuation" see Shamdasani, RB 207b; JAP 55 (2010) 38-9; JM 322; and for some very brief comments on the history of the word cf. ibid. 306 n.41 with R. Noll, The Jung cult (2°* ed., New York 1997) 367 n.42. On the absolutely central significance of the individuation process in Jung's later work see MDR 200/209; JAP 57 (2012) 366-7. For individuation as an entirely natural process that may require a kind of consciousness but often does not, see e.g. JS 210-12 and JZ ii 583 = JAP 46 (2001) 482; these statements by Jung about the total naturalness of the process are something that a conscientious modern Jungian can, of course, hardly be expected to accept (B. Stephens, ibid. 482-3). "Individuation is not that you become an ego ...": KY 39-40. On that "which is not the ego" cf. e.g. JZ ii 258-9, and for Jung's sharp distinction between individuation and individualism see especially TE 173-4 §§267-8; PPT 108 §227 (on extreme individualism as "essentially no more than a morbid reaction against an equally futile collectivism"). James Hillman once again reveals his ostentatious flair for trivializing Jung when he defines individuation as "the realization of innate idiosyncrasy ... It appears phenomenally, in any odd moment of differentness" (Sphinx 1, 1988, 14). For the utter objectivity -- as well as impersonality -- of the individuated state according to Jung see MDR 270-7/289-98, together with Paul Bishop's comments on the close correlation in Jung's mind between objectivity and eternity (Car/ Jung, London 2014, 187-8). And as for why the word "self" happens to be spelled with a small or lower-case 532 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE "s' in the standard English editions of Jung, it can be helpful to recall the simple explanation that "lower case is used in the Collected Works to avoid the appearance of esotericism" (A. Samuels, Jung and the post-Jungians, London 1985, 73). '2 [ndividuation as the inner process of dying "before surrendering oneself ...": JP 309 ("... bevor man sich dem Unpersonlichen tiberlisst"). For the terminology of surrender, or "sich tiberlassen", in German mystical literature see e.g. Semantik der Gelassenheit, ed. B. Hasebrink, $. Bernhardt and I. Frith (Gottingen 2012); Jung's use of it here raises major doubts about the truth of any blanket statement to the effect that "the mystic's unconditional and permanent surrender of his whole being, even his consciousness, to God, cannot be identified with the individuation process" (L. Schlamm, European journal of psychotherapy and counselling 9, 2007, 412 n.3). But it also raises additional questions about the validity of attempts to differentiate categorically between the process of individuation and mystical processes in general. On this important issue see now F. Bower, JAP 44 (1999) 567-9; Schlamm, Harvest 46/2 (2000) 108-28 and 52/1 (2006) 7-37; J.M. Spiegelman, PP 52 (2009) 260; J.P. Dourley, Jung and his mystics (Hove 2014); and note Jung's clear tendency to model the individuation process on mystical traditions while also formulating it, wherever possible, as a further refinement of spiritual norms (e.g. SD 225-6 §431, PPT 234 §448: for surrender cf. 82 §§186-7; and compare 8. Shamdasani's comment that "Individuation only means something in a soteriological context", JJ 4/1, 2010, 172). On Jungian analysis as preparing to die see RB 266-7, 273-5; the letter from Jung to Cary Baynes dated 2 November 1945 (CBA; cf. Shamdasani, Quadrant 38/1, 2008, 23-4); Spring (1970) 178 = JS 360; and note, too, Jung's pithy portrayal of NOTES TO PAGES IOQ -- III 533 the individuation process as what happens to a person when "outwardly he plunges into solitude, but inwardly into hell" (SZ 453 §1103). Unfortunately there are scholars now who enjoy comparing such statements by Jung with Pierre Hadot's research into the tired theme of philosophy as preparation for death among ancient Platonic and post-Platonic intellectuals (cf. e.g. R. Madera, Spring 92, 2015, 235-54). But what Jung found himself involved in has very little, if anything, to do with the trivializations and rationalizations by later Greek or Roman philosophers that Hadot has done such a skilful job of popularizing: on Hadot's own obsession with rationalizing and "rational control" see SW 111, 171. The experience of dying before one dies according to Parmenides, Empedocles and ancient mysteries: [DPW 61-76; Reality 29-43. 15 JP 308-9. When Jung calls individuation a "mystery", he also intends this word to be understood in the much stronger and more literal sense that the individuation process is a re- enactment of ancient initiation mysteries (cf. e.g. SZ 486 §1162, JZ i 141). His extended use of the Grail mythology here, just a few years before he died, in explaining the real meaning of individuation gives the lie to the very rational and unfortunately very fashionable idea nowadays that Jung saw his evolutionary task as being to leave the antiquated world of mythology behind so he could introduce people instead to a scientific or "post-mythic" world of psychology. On the contrary: his psychological work was aimed specifically at renewing forgotten myths and mysteries by restoring them, as a true scientist, to life. Note also his statement in 1934 that "individuation is now our mythology ... It is a great mystery ... we dont Anow what it is ..." (NZ i 208; cf. P. Pietikainen, Alchemists of human nature, London 2007, 127). In the sharpest 534 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE contrast to contemporary Jungians, who are often inclined to present individuation as a "system" which "is commonly nurtured in a consulting room in the presence of a therapist" (J. Weldon, Platonic Jung, Asheville 2017, 184), Jung himself emphasized that by no means does Jungian therapy lead to individuation except in the remote sense of being just one small step along the way towards the distant and elusive goal of a potential individuation (JZ ii 469). On the reality of individuation as only for the very few see -- aside from JP 308-9, spoken by Jung in 1958 -- SL 453 §1099 (written in 1916) with R. Noll, The Jung cult (2° ed., New York 1997) 249; M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 61 (spoken by Jung in 1959); M.E. Harding, Quadrant 8/2 (Winter 1975) 17 (spoken by him in 1960). In the 1940s Jung drew the quite logical conclusion that the vast majority of people are beyond being helped directly, and can only be influenced at all by a handful of individuated leaders who are not afraid to exert complete control through the power of "suggestibility" (SZ 609-10 §§1392-3, cf. C7221 §451). Pietikainen (Utopian studies 12/1, 2001, 48-9) is quite right to compare this scenario with the familiar Platonic, and ultimately Pythagorean, notion of philosopher-kings; but he is altogether wrong in suggesting that these leaders' purpose would be to "divine the psychological processes in the deep recesses of the human mind and explain to other, less privileged individuals what is wrong with them and how to right the wrong and to become true personalities". On the contrary: their role is not to deepen people's understanding or even change their attitudes, but simply to change their behaviour by exploiting their gullibility (SZ 610 §§1393). That, as Empedocles would say, is as much as can be humanly accomplished (ENM 360-9; Reality 326-37). NOTES TO PAGES III -- II2 535 On the democratizing of individuation see A. Samuels' dry analysis, Jung and the post-Jungians (London 1985) 110-13. The words "a Christification of many" occur inside the crucial final paragraph of Jung's Answer to Job but, if they are to be understood, they have to be read in their proper context: "The indwelling of the Holy Ghost, the third Divine Person, in man, brings about a Christification of many, and the question then arises whether these many are all complete God -- men. Such a transformation would lead to insufferable collisions between them, to say nothing of the unavoidable inflation to which the ordinary mortal, who is not freed from original sin, would instantly succumb ..." (Answer to Job, London 1954, 180; cf. PR 470 §758). In other words the "Christification of many' is logical enough as a theoretical or potential next step for humanity, if individual humans would only take on themselves the enormous burdens and sufferings involved without any trace of self-deception (RB 234b), but practically is unrealizable. As Paul Bishop sums the situation up: "From this conclusion, as logical as it might seem, Jung retreats, for various reasons. How would they all get on? Very badly ... What would the consequences for each of them, as an individual, be? Equally devastating ... Here -- in the very final paragraph of his Answer to Job -- Jung himself shifted the moment of total integration from the here-and-now into the Gnostic wastes of infinite time" (Jung's Answer to Job', Hove 2002, 161-2). But for the famous American Jungian Edward Edinger, and any number of later writers who have been fooled by him, these were all irrelevant niceties to be dispensed with. He abruptly stops quoting Jung at the catchy "Christification of many", forgets about the rest, and declares: "That is the relevant phrase ... the indwelling of the Holy Ghost, the third divine person in man, brings about a Christification of many' ... That is what 536 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE is meant by the imagery of the incarnation of God in many through the agency of the Holy Ghost" (PP 25, 1991, 44). As for pinning down the source of such evangelical strategies and infectious zeal, it may help to consider that Edinger's parents were both Jehovah's Witnesses (J//7P 1/1, 1999, 58; PP 39, 1999, 42). John Dourley also shows the irresistibility of such interpretative tactics when he quotes Jung's rough sketch of how the ancient gods turned into one god, then the god became man -- and now "even the God -- man seems to have descended from his throne and to be dissolving himself in ordinary people". Dourley swiftly announces that this means humanity itself is now "encouraged by the unconscious" to "pursue the emergence of its native divinity into consciousness", but somehow forgets to mention what Jung went on to say: "in our day even the God -- man seems to have descended from his throne and to be dissolving himself in ordinary people. That, no doubt, is the reason why his seat is empty. Instead, modern man suffers from a hubris of consciousness that borders on the pathological. This psychic state in individuals corresponds to what, on a larger scale, is the hypertrophy and totalitarian pretensions of the ideal State ..." (Psychologie und Religion, 4" ed., Zurich 1962, 99, cf. PR 84 §141; Dourley in Psychology and religion at the millennium and beyond, ed. J.M. Spiegelman, Tempe 1998, 24). For the comment about "a psychology that purports to offer to all ..." see M. Saban in How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and M. Stein (Hove 2013) 10. On the razor-sharp path which will cut you to pieces and is so full of suffering that only very few are capable of walking it, see TE 239 §401 where Jung makes sure to quote the biblical and ancient initiatory saying "Many are called but few are chosen" (Matthew 22:14; cf. NOTES TO PAGES I12-I14 537 Plato, Phaedo 69c). On the inadequacy of all theories, routine rules or recipes cf. e.g. SL 493 §1172; C.G. Jung, Entretiens (Paris 2010) 173; JP B27 (13 June 1958). For the methodology and techniques of ancient Hermetic teachers see P. Kingsley, Parabola 22/1 (Spring 1997) 21-5 and in P/B 17-40. Jung was very conscious of the debt owed by his theory of individuation to "Hermetic" philosophy in the broadest sense of the word (SZ 486 §1162, cf. PR 468 §755). 16 Hermetic immortalization and deification: J. -- P. Mahé, Vigiliae Christianae 45 (1991) 347-75; M.D. Litwa, Becoming divine (Eugene 2013) 94-101. For individuation as life in God see SZ 719 §1624, where Jung can still be heard crying out that "Individuation is the life in God" because a person "is obviously not whole without God" and this wholeness is the only conceivable meaning of either divine incarnation or individuation. Individuation as deification: "Whoever does not follow the principium individuationis to its end does not become a god, because he is not able to endure the singleness" (BB v 168 = RBu 371b, presented by Jung as a commentary on John 10:34). For immortality see e.g. [JP 154 ("when we obtain a complete realization of self, there comes with it the feeling of immortality ... a feeling of eternity on this earth"); G. Lachman, Jung the mystic (New York 2010) 145. As for the "certainty of immortality" that comes from being initiated into the "mystery of deification", one of the most telling passages is Jung's autobiographical account of what happened in December 1913 when he experienced being transformed into the lion- headed god Aion of the ancient Mithraic mysteries. See [/P 103-7; RB 252; R. Noll, Spring 53 (1994) 12-60 and The Jung cult (2" ed., New York 1997) 209-15; M. Stein, Transformation (College Station 1998) 43-6 and in Initiation, ed. T. Kirsch, 538 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE V.B. Rutter and T. Singer (Hove 2007) 91-4 (although Stein's attempt to distinguish between "deliberate" and "spontaneous" initiation has little basis in fact); C. MacKenna in Insanity and divinity, ed. J. Gale, M. Robson and G. Rapsomatioti (Hove 2014) 64-6. Many things could be said about the blatantly false claim that this "mystery of deification" and the resulting "certainty of immortality" were, according to Jung's account at [JP 106, only experienced by ancient initiates and not by Jung himself (A. Stevens, JAP 42, 1997, 673) but none of them is polite; and the rational insistence on distinguishing in such a context between "actual transformation" and merely "symbolic" experience (L. Corbett, J/ 5/3, 2011, 73) reveals, as we will see, a complete misunderstanding of what Jung meant by symbolic reality. There are two points about this experience of deification that need mentioning here. First, Cary de Angulo's visualization of Jung as a Mithraic priest belonging to the "highest rank of all" (draft letter to Jung dated 13 November 1923: CBA) demonstrates how very alive and potent this seminal experience of Jung's still was for those around him ten years later. Second, years before the Red book's publication, Gilles Quispel had already concluded that Jung must have been familiar with one crucial passage in a major work by Robert Eisler which identifies this same lion- headed god as the Orphic god Phanes -- who just so happens to overshadow Jung's Red book as well as Black books. See R. Eisler, Weltenmantel und Himmelszelt (Munich 1910) ii 398-405 with Orphicorum et Orphicis similium testimonia et fragmenta i, ed. A. Bernabé (Munich 2004) 90; G. Quispel in Gnosis, ed. B. Aland (Gottingen 1978) 497-507 = his Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica (Leiden 2008) 248-60; RB 113, 301-2 n.211 "... Phanes is Jung's God ...", 354-5 n.125, 364. And Quispel was right: the precise start of that very same passage he had guessed at is still carefully indicated, with a silk bookmark, inside Jung's own NOTES TO PAGE I14 539 personal copy of the book by Eisler. As far as Jung's library is concerned, it also is worth noting that the marginal markings in his books show how fascinated he was by the ancient Greek phenomenon of immortalization and deification; he was particularly struck by Empedocles' own declaration that he had become a god (H. Leisegang, Die Gnosis, Leipzig 1924, 84; compare his copies of A. Dieterich, Eine Mithrasliturgie, 2" ed., Leipzig 1910, 5; R. Reitzenstein, Die Aellenistischen Mysterienreligionen, Leipzig 1910, 19-20, 25, 44-5; W. Scott, Hermetica i, Oxford 1924, 239-49). And as for becoming a god, there is no reason whatever to question the authenticity of a report involving the prominent Jungian Jolande Jacobi (NL 165; JBA): "On one occasion she had a dream in which Jung appeared to her as a God-figure. On telling him the dream, he replied, 'So now you know who I am!" "' For example Sonu Shamdasani falls straight into this trap when he asserts that, if Jung ever mentions the lived feeling of immortality, he of course doesn't mean immortality in any "literal" sense and is discounting the whole phenomenon as nothing but a projection from the unconscious (Cult fictions, London 1998, 52; contrast e.g. [JP 153-4). This distorted rationalization by Shamdasani of Jung's ideas would have made even his mentor, Michael Fordham, blush with shame. In fact he is demonstrating exactly what, according to Jung himself, happens when intellectuals impose their "overvalued reason" on a mystery like the experience of immortality -- and leave everyone "pauperized" as a result (DR 280/301-2). On Jung's own disdain for reductive attempts at explaining psychological phenomena in terms of "nothing but", cf. e.g. C.G. Jung: psychological reflections, ed. J. Jacobi (2TM ed., Princeton 1970) 11, 16-17, 93, 121, 201. 540 TWO ! BACK TO THE SOURCE 8 "Psychology is concerned ...", "inner vision", and "we cannot understand a thing ...": PA 13-14 §§14-15. Unfortunately Shamdasani (Cult fictions, London 1998, 29) cites Jung's firm opposition to "the construction of new religious truths" without explaining the other half of his equation: the need to help people rediscover the act of seeing by restoring their inner vision. On the crucial importance of learning simply to see without imitating or identifying with what one sees, see RB 251a. By temperament Jung was, of course, completely hostile to the construction of new religious truths -- but that's only because his own work lay in the reincarnation of ancient religious truths (FJ 484 §269J, 29 August 1911; RB 311). " For an introduction to Christ as symbol of the self see e.g. Aion 36-71 §§68-126. An essential element of symbols is, for Jung, their mystical openness to the mysterious and the unknown (PT 474-6 §§815-19, OPT 140-1). They are always more, not less, than any physical object or concept they correspond to: are "pregnant" with a special healing and redeeming value which unifies both conscious and unconscious, rational and irrational (PT 474-7 §§816-20, CT 18 §24, AS 28 §44, Man and his symbols, New York 1964, 20-1, 55; and compare the exact definition of a symbol at RB 311a). On one level the Red book, and Jung's work in its entirety, can be seen as a passionate protest against the view that symbols are less real than physical entities -- even ourselves. See especially RB 233-4 (the physical reality of Jung and of those he loves is no more than a symbol of their souls), 236 (symbols predate and outlive our physical world), 246-9 (Elijah humorously insists that he and any other figures Jung meets in the unconscious are no less real than Jung is, and can only be called symbols if one agrees to call every physical person a symbol; this is completely misunderstood as "Jung's ambivalence about symbolic versus NOTES TO PAGES 115116 541 literal reality" by A. Collins and E. Molchanov, Spring 90, 2013, 68 n.45), 250a (the symbol as infallible lord and master), 291a (symbols are the only access to truth), 304a (only symbols have power to save from the worst of acts or deeds), 310-11, 339b. Paul Bishop has pointed to the relevance for Jungian psychology of Goethe's ideas about symbolism, especially his paradoxical insistence that a symbol "is the thing without being the thing, and yet it is the thing" (Goethes Werke, Erste Abtheilung, xlix/1, Weimar 1898, 142.7-8; Bishop in Morphologie und Moderne, ed. J. Maatsch, Berlin 2014, 160-1). But at the same time, Jung was very familiar with ancient resonances of the word symbolon (see e.g. MDR 309/335: for some of those resonances compare APMM 238, 289-90, 301- 3); and that only serves to intensify the similarities between the refusal of most Jung scholars to take his ideas about symbolism seriously and scholars' almost universal refusal to take those beings who appear to Parmenides, during his descent into the underworld, as anything more than simple "allegories" or metaphors. On this major problem in the study of Parmenides see Reality 29, 273 -- 4, 583, L. Gemelli Marciano, Ancient philosophy 28 (2008) 21-7, PSIE 54-8, 257 n.92; for Jung's own explicit differentiation of symbols from mere allegories see PT 474 §815, ST'77 §114, 222 §329; and on intellectuals' "secret fear" of real symbols because of their living power compare J. Jacobi's comment, Complex, archetype, symbol in the psychology of C.G. Jung (London 1959) 87-8. Unfortunately, in this respect many practising Jungians nowadays fall headlong into the category of fearful intellectuals. 29 "An inner experience, an assimilation of Christ ..." and "the 'Christ within': Aion 183 §§285 -- 6. The "immediate and living presence" as opposed to "the idea of the historical Christ": ibid. 68 §123. The inescapably mystical nature of understanding 542 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE Christ as symbol of the self is acknowledged with all due clarity by Jung at PA 355 §452 -- where the recognition of oneself "as the equivalent of Christ", and of "Christ as a symbol of the self", is described by him as such a "tremendous conclusion" that even westerners acquainted on a strictly intellectual level with "the spirit of the Upanishads" or other eastern mystical ideas stand no real chance of understanding it. And to remove any possible ambiguity or doubt he takes great care to situate this same reality that he himself refers to as "the 'Christ within" (4ion 183 §285) in the specific context of medieval mysticism, Gnosticism and esoteric Christianity (SZ 280 §638). Each of these factors helps to explain Cary de Angulo's realization that only through being granted special access to Jung's work on the Red book had she been given the clue to uncovering what was really "true" in the world of mystical literature and thought without losing herself, as people always do, in the usual superficial or literal misunderstandings (draft letter to Jung dated 22 October 1922, CBA). Needless to say, finding the clue to the true essence of mysticism ignored even by most mystics is the ultimate mystical endeavour. Aside from Jung's own unending frustrations at people's hopelessly confused ideas about what true mysticism is (see e.g. PR 184 §274;, FP 339 §781), note also the remarkable passage he wrote about symbols at a time when he was working on his Red book. In the chapter he devoted to definitions near the end of his Psychological types he eftectively equated the three terms "mystical", "transcendent", and "psychological" ("an as yet unknown and incomprehensible fact of a mystical or transcendent, i.e. psychological, nature": PT 474 §815). 21 Parmenides frs. 2.1, 6.4 -- 7/, 1.34 -- 5 and Empedocles frs, 2.1-7, 4.9-13, 17.21 and 25-6, 21.1-3 Diels = Parmenides frs. 11.1, 13.5-8, 14.3-4 and Empedocles frs. 7.8-17, 9.15-19, 26.28 and NOTES TO PAGES 116-120 543 32-3, 31.5-8 plus 28.15-24 Gemelli Marciano; Reality 79-125, 179-99, 326-559. 22 Both the words "no longer a struggle ..." and the striking statement that it's not the ego but the a/éthinos anthropos, the "true Man" or divine self inside a human, who walks the inner path of transformation come from Mysterium coniunctionis (ii, Zurich 1956, 102-3 §157 in the original Swiss edition; cf. MC 349 §492). The truth in this statement is something only a mystic can understand: see Llewellyn Vaughan-Lee, The circle of love (Inverness, CA 1999) 136-7. 23 "You are quite right ...": letter to PW. Martin, written by Jung in English and dated 20 August 1945 (JL i 377; A. Jaffe, Was C.G. Jung a mystic?, Einsiedeln 1989, 16; M. Stein in The idea of the numinous, ed. A. Casement and D. 'Tacey, Hove 2006, 34 = Minding the self, Hove 2014, 38; 8. Shamdasani, JAP 55, 2010, 41; L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots, Los Angeles 2013, 7). On Martin and Jung see SZ 606 n.1; W. McGuire, Bollingen (Princeton 1982) 136-7; also Emma Jung's letter to Cary Baynes dated 24 October 1944 (CBA). For the connection in Jung's mind between the numinous, the unexpected, the inconceivable and the outwardly impossible see e.g. JP 324-5; also ACU 17 §35, MDR 328/356. 2" For a partial insight into modern strategies for handling the numinous see e.g. Jung's 'Red book' for our time, ed. M. Stein and T. Arzt, ii (Asheville 2018) and especially The idea of the numinous, ed. A. Casement and D. Tacey (Hove 2006). On Lucy Huskinson's blunt denial that the numinous can have any healing power (ibid. 210) see L. Schlamm, European journal of psychotherapy and counselling 9 (2007) 411 n.1; her assertion that "although the numinous cannot be understood on an 544 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE objective level, it can be known subjectively" (200: compare the similar remarks by A. Samuels, Jung and the post-Jungians, London 1985, 27, 43) undermines the very foundation of Jung's own deepest understanding. As for Samuels' apparently wise statement that with the numinous "there is considerable room for self-deception" (ibid. 77), what he avoids mentioning is the even more considerable room for self-deception which exists in thinking one can avoid the numinous. During her final lecture Marie-Louise von Franz offered an appropriate reminder that "disregard of the numinous powers is, according to Jung, the essence of evil" (JJ 2/2, 2008, 12); the shocked reaction on the part of prominent modern-day Jungians to this last lecture of hers (e.g. J. Beebe, ibid. 3/4, 2009, 28-38) is an interesting indicator of where many of them might line up along Jung's own moral spectrum. Jung explains the meaning of the word "apotropaic": TE 238 n.7; KY 33, SD 99 §§206-7, Entretiens (Paris 2010) 96-7. "You'll think up ...": RB 291b. On the subject of domesticating the gods, John Dourley is willing to state in clear words what others might prefer not to acknowledge openly (Psychology and religion at the millennium and beyond, ed. J.M. Spiegelman, Tempe 1998, 23). "A mere expedient ...": JK 171; Jung's comment here deserves to be set alongside J.S. Bernstein's poignant observations about the more or less inevitable "one-sidedness" of any psychotherapy when faced with the numinous reality of what Bernstein refers to as borderland persons, or phenomena (Living in the borderland, Hove 2005, 78-9). 5 "Like it or not": JZ ii 112 (cf. ii 20); P. Bishop, Jung's Answer to Job' (Hove 2002) 41 -- 4. For the numinous as our tool or the other way around see e.g. RB 291b, "You want to employ it, but you are its tool", PR 84 §141; JL i 492. Reference to experience of the numinous as "the therapeutic resource that distinguishes NOTES TO PAGES 120-123 545 Jungian therapy and theory from other traditions": J. Dourley, JAP 47 (2002) 490. For Lucifer in Jung's account of how "every spiritual truth gradually turns into something material, becoming no more than a tool in the hand of man", see 4S 248-50 §§301-3. Characteristically, prominent Jungians who do comment on this passage make sure to invert the sequence of Jung's own exposition so as to give it all a positive spin (e.g. E.F. Edinger, Anatomy of the psyche, LaSalle 1985, 179-80) -- which happens to be the identical technique used so effectively by commentators to sanitize Empedocles' cosmic cycle, and with such disastrous results (ENM 343, 385-6). 26 "\Wanted God to be alive ...": PP 6 (1975) 12. For the indigenous elder known as Mountain Lake, the disastrous effects of "American rationalism", and Jung's own comments about guarding his light because "it is most precious ...", see M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 88 = JL ii 597, For Jung on the crucial importance of the "religious attitude", and on the absolute indispensability of a true "sense of historical continuity", see e.g. PPT 46 §99 with JZ ii 488; for the decisive question in a person's life, and the life that's wasted, MDR 300/325; and for the soul of humanity, the alchemical opus magnum, "the whole weight of mankind's problems" and the "supreme responsibility" this involves, PPT 235 §449. On Jung's thoughts all circling around the divine see also JL ii 235-8. There have been some fine studies of Jung's religious attitude (cf. M. Stein in Analytical psychology, ed. J. Cambray and L. Carter, Hove 2004, 204-22), although without an exact understanding of what he meant by historical continuity they can only tell a fragment of the story. 27 Chrétien de Troyes, Le roman de Perceval ou le conte du Graal, ed. K. Busby (Tiibingen 1993) 138-40, 271, 504. 546 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE 28 'The repeated image of Jung during his journey to India as someone constantly withdrawing in search of the inner truth unique to him alone (UDR 257/275, 262/280, 265/284) is an obvious reminiscence of the famous words spoken by the ancient Greek philosopher he was most familiar with, Heraclitus: the saying "I searched inside myself" (edizésamén emeouton) was specially annotated by Jung in his own copy of Heraclitus' collected Greek fragments (Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, ed. H. Diels, 3% ed., Berlin 1912, i 97.14, cf. 86.11-12; J. Olney, The rhizome and the flower, Berkeley 1980, 90 n.4, 93). On the paradoxical effects of being so far removed from Europe see JP 309. The immensity of the impression made on Jung by his Kolkata dream, although understated in MDR, is duly noted at JP 306 and 308; it's also no accident that he compares the special significance of his time in India during 1938, including the sickness and dream, to the crucial importance of his famous illness during 1944 (JP 359), ETG 286; cf. MDR 263-4/282-3, MDRC 287-8. For the dream itself see MDR 262-3/280-2, MDRC 283-8, JP 306-10, 357-9. The utterly inhuman qualities of the dream as emphasized by Jung -- metallic, cold, full of horror and terror, inexorably harsh and hard -- have a direct bearing on his comment that the intensity of what he experienced while visiting India was something to be measured not in weeks or months, but in centuries (JP 358). For the small, nondescript place where what is most precious has been hidden away unnoticed by anyone see JP 308; this was a Gnostic and alchemical, as well as biblical, theme very dear to Jung. 30 Compare, for example, the point where Jung calls salvation "the resolution of the task" and specifically defines this as giving birth to the ancient; as bringing back the old in a time NOTES TO PAGES 124-130 547 that is new (RB 310a, cf. RB 311b). For comments on Jung as healer of his culture see e.g. J. Hillman and 8S. Shamdasani's impressionistic meanderings in Lament of the dead (New York 2013) 145-61, or A. Haaning's more coherent observations at JAP 59 (2014) 8-30, plus Jung's own telling comparison of himself to a medicine man -- which to him was the simplest way of describing the task he had been "wrestling with" for the whole of his life (JZ ii 586-9). Joseph Henderson famously came up with the Jungian theory of a "cultural unconscious'; but however satisfying as a concept, it lacks any sense at all of the urgent need or focused duty or very particular obligation that Jung found himself confronted with in regard to the healing of western culture. See e.g. J.L. Henderson in Proceedings of the second international congress for analytical psychology, ed. A. Guggenbuhl -- Craig (Basel 1964) 3-14 and Cultural attitudes in psychological perspective (Toronto 1984); S.L. Kimbles, SF/I 22/2 (Summer 2003) 53-8 with The cultural complex, ed. 1. Singer and Kimbles (Hove 2004); Singer and C. Kaplinsky in Jungian psychoanalysis, ed. M. Stein (Chicago 2010) 22-37. 31 For references to the scholarly literature see e.g. L.O. Gémez in Curators of the Buddha, ed. D.S. Lopez (Chicago 1995) 197-250; L. Schlamn, JJ/JS 2 (2010) 32 -- 44 and in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2"¢ ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 956-61. In this context the section of the Red book where Jung encounters Izdubar coming from the East is, symbolically, very revealing (RB 35-66, 277-86). 52 T am summarizing and translating the text as first published in Chinesisch-deutscher Almanach fur das Jahr 1931 (Frankfurt 1930) 10-11 and reprinted in Jung's Uber das Phanomen des Geistes in Kunst und Wissenschaft (2TM ed., Ostfildern 2011) 68-9 548 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE §§87-9, with the help of Cary Baynes' magnificent English version (R. Wilhelm and C.G. Jung, The secret of the golden flower, London 1931, 145-7); the supposedly authoritative translation offered at SM 58-9 §§87 -- 9 is altogether unreliable. Jung refers quite explicitly to Wilhelm's own "cultural task" in the healing of western civilization and of its spiritual need (Chinesisch -- deutscher Almanach 11; Uber das Phanomen des Geistes 68 §87; The secret of the golden flower 145). As Edward Edinger very nicely put it when asked what Jung thought of westerners embracing eastern religions: "he thought it was an evasion of their own destiny and heritage" (J//7P 1/1, 1999, 54). Compare also Jung's own statement about the urgency of the need "to build on our own ground with our own methods. If we snatch these things directly from the East, we have merely indulged our Western acquisitiveness, confirming yet again that 'everything good is outside', whence it has to be fetched and pumped into our barren souls" (in W.Y. Evans -- Wentz, The Tibetan book of the great liberation, London 1954, xxxviii = PR 483 §773); The secret of the golden flower 80, "It is not for us to imitate what is organically foreign, or worse still, to send out missionaries to foreign peoples; it is our task to build up our own Western culture, which sickens with a thousand ills"; ACU 14-15 §§27-8. On the all-consuming hunger and greed of missionaries, as well as those who stand behind them, see NZ i 213. As for Jung's comment about the light of wisdom that "only shines in the dark" (Chinesisch-deutscher Almanach 11 = The secret of the golden flower 146): this takes us right to the heart of his life, not to mention his work. Already since a child he had felt like an initiate into the realms of darkness, and this inner alignment with darkness guided him in his work for the rest of his life (MDR 28/15, 55/45, 92/87; compare JP 176, on the "dunkle Substanz" or dark substance that linked him to the alchemists; and see also JP 211-14 on Jung, Merlin and the NOTES TO PAGES 130-131 549 magic of darkness together with $.A. Hoeller, The Gnostic Jung and the 'Seven sermons to the dead', Wheaton, IL 1982, 204 and R. Padel, In and out of the mind, Princeton 1992, 72 n.84). He agreed to identifying the essence of his work with the biblical pillar of fire that offers guidance through the night, as opposed to the pillar of cloud that provides guidance through the day (RB 213b). And in describing "the primordial light-bringer, who is never himself the light", he was not only defining the role of darkly ambiguous Mercurius. He was also defining, to perfection, his own role in life (4S 248 §300: for Jung himself as light-bringer in the depths of darkness see E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 163, 176). That, after all, is why he would give such a special place of honour at Bollingen to the alchemical saying "I give birth to the light even though my nature is darkness" (Artis auriferae volumen secundum, Basle 1593, 239; this crucial statement is reduced to gibberish in the English translation at 4S 125 §161 and in e.g. 8. Marlan's The black sun, College Station 2005, 99). Very wisely he understood that, while the selfless task of humanity two thousand years ago had been to help the darkness understand the light (John 1:5-10), now our collective attachment to light has become nothing but selfish laziness. Everything changes with time, and the present task is for the light to understand the darkness (PR 468 §756). Or as Jung stated the matter very simply, "One doesn't become enlightened by visualizing images of light but by making the darkness conscious" (Studien tiber alchemistische Vorstellungen, 3" ed., Olten 1988, 286 §335, cf. AS 265-6 §335) -- although the trick is that we don't make the darkness conscious through our own conscious intentions, but through the intelligence of the darkness itself (RB 237a with n.78). 53 For the "plant-like naiveté" which "is able to express profound things in simple language" see R. Wilhelm and 550 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE C.G. Jung, The secret of the golden flower (London 1931) 149. "Gnosis should be an experience of your own life ..." is from Constance Long's transcription -- as preserved inside her diary, now held at the Countway Library of Medicine in Boston -- of a letter Jung had sent her on 17 December 1921. Apart from the fact that Richard Noll's published rendering of her transcript is as a whole astonishingly inaccurate, the way he interprets the text in terms of a supposed "German spirituality" is the crudest twisting and distortion of Jung's own aims and purpose (The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 258-9). In tone, as well as content, this letter is particularly close to the already famous address by Jung to his "friends" at the start of the Red book (RB 231 with nn.23, 29). "Don't be greedy ...": RB 231b. On the poison for westerners of "foreign gods" see also JK 25 (Indian breathing exercises; cf. 33-5) and KY 14, 20; for the crucial importance of tending one's own garden, RB 306a, 316a. *4 For the masses who "claim in vain that they have found the whole" see Empedocles fr. 2.6 Diels = fr. 7.15 Gemelli Marciano with H. Stein, Empedoclis Agrigentini fragmenta (Bonn 1852) 30; ENM 360-1 with n.62; Reality 326 (cf. 24, 81, 165). Regarding traditional usage of these expressions, see for example the Gospel of John 4:42 -- where Christ's characteristic title in later Greek, Ao sétér tou Rosmou, would be translated into Latin as both sa/vator mundi (Vulgate) and the more classically stylish servator mundi (Erasmus). It will be noted that in ancient Greek, as well as Latin, saving was an essential part of preserving while protecting or keeping safe was the natural job of a saviour (H. Ebeling, Lexicon homericum ii, Leipzig 1880, 269-70; J. Fontenrose, Didyma, Berkeley 1988, 140-1). For the praise of Christ by alchemists as sa/vator mundi NOTES TO PAGES 131-133 551 see e.g. Musaeum hermeticum (Frankfurt 1678) 725 and, on the role of Christus servator at the intersection between Latin occult and theological literature, W. Schmidt-Biggemann, Geschichte der christlichen Kabbala ii (Stuttgart 2013) 183 with n.114; 348 with n.87. Jung himself was particularly fond of one passage in Khunrath (cf. ibid. 51) that describes the crucified Christ as both saviour of humanity or the microcosm, sa/wator mundi minoris, and preserver of the world or macrocosm, servator mundi maioris: AS 126-7 §162 with n.43; MC 264-5 §355, 580 n.28; reformulated by Jung as sa/vator macrocosmi at PA 24 §26. For his use of the words servator and sa/vator together compare Aion 183 §286; AS 235-6 §283, 250 §303, 295-6 §390; and note also Flying saucers (London 1959) 28 = CT 332 §629 on Mercurius as "a kind of panacea, saviour, and servator mundi (preserver of the world). Mercurius is a 'bringer of healing' ... as the 'food of immortality' he saves Creation from sickness and corruption, just as Christ saved mankind". Christ or the self as mystical vessel filled with the Holy Spirit which is servator mundi: JL ii 267. On Christ as sa/vator mundi see esp. Aion 127 §194, AS 242 §290 and ETG 215, where the Latin phrase has been stripped out of the English edition. Interestingly, while the English version of Jung's published biography has his Kolkata dream culminate in the phrase servator mundi, the German version here has adopted the more familiar sa/vator mundi (ibid. 286). $6 Richard Noll famously encountered a savage reaction to his claims that Jung was responsible for creating as well as promoting "a religious movement whose goal is not only the salvation of the individual, but also of the world" and that already right from the start he had considered psychology "the new salvation of the world, with Jung as the prophet". See his The Jung cult (2"* ed., New York 1997) 202, 254; The 552 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE Aryan Christ (New York 1997) 112, 201; P. Homans, SF/I 14/2 (Summer 1995) 8-9. But although there is no denying that Noll's books are cesspits of sensationalism and sloppy scholarship, it's only right to note that they occasionally contain some very accurate intuitions -- and also to ponder Jung's constant reminder that the rarest of truths is always found in the unlikeliest and dirtiest of places, despised by the high priests as well as academics (cf. e.g. PA 80-1 §103, 123 §160, 313 §421, 430 §514). 37 "Christ in the garden of Gethsemane" and "servator cosmi (preserver of the cosmos)": AS 295-6 §390. On Jung's identification of his dream companions as members of the Psychological Club see JP 306, 307; and for his comparison of himself to Christ at Gethsemane, and the members of the Club to Christ's disciples, ibid. 308. It will be noted that Richard Noll, for all his faults, arrived by a different route and using different texts at precisely the same conclusion: Jung "even drew the analogy between the members of the club and the apostles of Christ" (The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 156). Sight- seeing: JP 306; D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 428. 58 Jung's attacks on those who set themselves up as world saviours go back to the inaugural dissertation he wrote during his mid-twenties. See e.g. Psychiatric studies (2TM ed., London 1970) 16 §34; RB 231b, 298b, 309b, 316-17; Collected papers on analytical psychology (2"* ed., New York 1917) 462 ("God- Almightiness") and TE 169 §260 ("inflation"), 286 §476; SL 750 §1699; JS 363. For the record, one should add that Freud together with his close circle were very much taken aback by Jung's early aspirations to save the world through becoming "another Christ" (The complete correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Ernest Jones, 1908-1939, ed. R.A. Paskauskas, Cambridge, NOTES TO PAGES 133-136 553 MA 1993, 180, 182). And good note should also be taken of Jung's own clear hint that the inflationary effects of contact with the unconscious can never be altogether avoided (TE 233- -- 4 §§389 -- 90). On the virtues of love and wisdom see his letter to Alice Raphael dated 7 June 1955 (Alice Raphael papers, Beinecke Library, Yale University; JH 2/2, 2007, 6); for the "necessary humour", JE 170 §262 (where Jung's original "Lacherlichkeit" would be better translated as "laughable absurdity") with SZ 750 §1699, JZ ii 324 and E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 179. 39 [JP 107. For a classic example of failure to distinguish between the experience of deification and the inflationary state of god-almightiness see 8. Shamdasani, Cult fictions (London 1998) 50-1. On deification for Jung as a major "initiation" he had to pass through cf. e.g. M. Stein in Initiation, ed. T. Kirsch, V.B. Rutter and T. Singer (Hove 2007) 93; also his comments in Transformation (College Station 1998) 44-6. That "the experience of self-deification represents the beginning and not the end of a psychological process" (L. Schlamm, Religion 28, 1998, 98) is a truth acknowledged not only by Jung, but by many mystics. The famous Sufi [bn al -- Arabi demonstrated through his own life the paradox of how, after the state of oneness with God, comes the stage of becoming God's humble servant (C. Addas, Quest for the red sulphur, Cambridge 1993) -- and, incidentally, also explained that the God I experience is not the Godhead itself but the very personal God-image unique to me (see Corbin, AWA). This can be a useful reminder that such distinctions are not unique to Jung and don't require any knowledge of German philosophy. For a vivid account of practical Sufism and its intimate familiarity with the phenomena of inflation see Irina lweedie's Daughter of fire (Nevada City 1986), especially 378-9; ancient Hermetic 554 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE texts with which Jung himself was very well acquainted reveal a similar insight into the subtleties of human psychology (P. Kingsley, Parabola 22/1, Spring 1997, 21 -- 5 and in PJB 17-40); and for the direct links between Hermetic and Sufi traditions see ibid. 29 nn.24 and 26, 38 with 39 nn.45 and 46. On the recognized problem of inflation among Christian mystics cf. e.g. Schlamm in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2"4 ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 872. "The great psychotherapeutic systems ...": ST. 356 §553. "0 Halfway between one's conscious self and the depths of the unconscious: compare, for example, TE 221-2 §§364 -- 5. Hidden away inside the human body: PR 278 §421; MC 477-8 §681, 499 §711, 543 §775. On Jung and his meeting with Mountain Lake -- he describes the encounter as so uniquely and profoundly real that it left him at a loss for the right words to explain what happened (JP 370) -- see e.g. MDR 233-8/247-53; M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 87-8 = JL ii 596-7. But note, also, Jung's own earlier reference to the "saving symbol" of the spoken word that "leads the sun on high" (RB 310b: compare the comment by D.G. Barton about Jung's encounter with Mountain Lake mirroring back to him his own experiences while working on the Red book, I[JS 8, 2016, 82). The deep respect and admiration displayed by Jung for Mountain Lake were reciprocated: the two of them stayed in touch and remained friends for many years (W. McGuire, Spring 1978, 43; cf. JZ i 101-2). "The cosmos would collapse": M.H. Yousef, [bn Arabi -- time and cosmology (Abingdon 2008) 15, referring specifically to the symbol of the pillar as image of the perfected human being. This image of the perfect human being as a pillar was very familiar to Jung, and he annotated each mention of it carefully in his own copy of the Manichaean Kephalaia (ed. H.J. Polotsky and A. Bohlig i, NOTES TO PAGES 136-142 555 Stuttgart 1935-7). For the controversial popularizing of similar traditions in Judaism about the hidden few who are needed to keep the world intact see André Schwartz -- Bart's The last of the just (London 1959) with e.g. B. Wolfsteiner, Untersuchungen zum franzosisch-judischen Roman nach dem Zweiten Weltkrieg (Tubingen 2003) 168-80, 350-1; Murray Stein, sensibly enough, cites this material for its relevance to Jungian issues of inflation and identification (Sou/, Hove 2016, 155). "' For Eugene Rolfe's correspondence with Jung -- in English -- through November and December 1960 see his Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 157-80, esp. 163, 176. It will be noted that to another Englishman, Sir Herbert Read, Jung in fact makes a very deliberate point at around the same time of comparing himself to a medicine man (JL ii 586-9, 2 September 1960). On the other hand Rolfe complains to Jung with more than a little sadness that, although the British Society of Analytical Psychology which had been founded to further his work contained "a number of brilliant names', nobody there was even remotely capable of combining "the roles of Discoverer, Healer, 'Teacher and Artist" because Jung alone represented a "living embodiment" of his own theories (Rolfe 164, cf. 161-2). On the apparent ordinariness of an individuated human being see e.g. JZ ii 324; and for Jung's typical association of the phrase "archetypal life" with the legendary life of Christ, PR 157 §233. It can be helpful, here, to remember that at the start of the same year Jung had also written to James Kirsch -- a particularly influential and thrusting Jungian -- to give him the soundest of verbal thrashings for the chaos he was causing through his inflated identification with the archetype of the Anthropos or cosmic Christ (JK 259-60: 12 February 1960). This helps to put in its full and true perspective his rare comment almost thirty 556 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE years earlier to the effect that, even though to start with there is a constant danger of being swallowed by an archetype, there is also a very long but perfectly natural process which ends at last in the mastership of realizing one's identity as a human with the archetype: of discovering that the archetype "is in a peculiar way man, as man is an archetype" (NZ i 318-19). That Rolfe, for his part, was spot on in referring to Jung as a living embodiment of his own teaching is clear from Jung's light- hearted conclusion to the light-hearted interview he gave on his eightieth birthday: "Do you know who already anticipated the whole of my psychology in the eighteenth century? The Hasidic Rabbi Baer from Meseritz, who was called 'the Great Maggid'. He was an extremely remarkable man" (Michael Schabad, "Besuch bei C.G. Jung", National-Zeitung 26 July 1955; cf. JS 271-2 and, for Jung's lively laughter and humour throughout the interview, ibid. 268-9, 271-2). Sanford Drob has beaten this delightful statement to death in a hundred different ways, taking it as proof that inwardly Jung became a Jew before he died while citing abstruse teachings of Rabbi Baer which Jung himself could never have read or heard about in his lifetime. But, in sober fact, there can be no doubt at all as to what Jung had read inside the comfort of his own library which triggered such a special sense of affinity with the Great Maggid: "The new movements gave birth to a new type of leader, the illuminate, the man whose heart has been touched and changed by God, in a word, the prophet ... Rabbi Israel of Koznitz used to say that he had read eight hundred Kabbalistic books before coming to his teacher, the "Great Maggid of Meseritz', but that he had really learned nothing from them ... Lhe new element must therefore not be sought on the theoretical and literary plane, but rather in the experience of an inner revival, in the spontaneity of feeling generated in sensitive minds by the encounter with the living incarnations of NOTES TO PAGES 142-144 557 Mysticism ... Rabbi Baer of Meseritz ... gives a new emphasis to psychology, instead of theosophy ... the secrets of the Divine realm are presented in the guise of mystical psychology. It is by descending into the depths of his own self that man wanders through all the dimensions of the world ... in his own self, finally, he transcends the limits of natural existence and at the end of his way, without, as it were, a single step beyond himself, he discovers that God is 'All in All' and there is "Nothing but Him' ... Hasidism is practical mysticism at its highest. Almost all the Kabbalistic ideas are now placed in relation to values peculiar to the individual life, and those which are not remain empty and ineffective ... A tale is told of a famous saint who said: 'I did not go to the Maggid of Meseritz to learn Torah from him but to watch him tie his boot-laces'. This pointed and somewhat extravagant saying ... at least throws some light on the complete irrationalization of religious values which set in with the cult of the great religious personality. The new ideal of the religious leader, the Zaddik, differs from the traditional ideal of Rabbinical Judaism, the 72/mid Hakham or student of the Torah, mainly in that he himself 'has become Torah'. It is no longer his knowledge but his life which lends a religious value to his personality. He is the living incarnation of the Torah" (Gershom Scholem, Major trends in Jewish mysticism, Jerusalem 1941, 329-39). One has to remember that Jung didn't call Rabbi Baer from Meseritz a man who held extremely remarkable beliefs: he called him an extremely remarkable man. 2 On the "irrational and impossible condition" always associated with the appearance of the saviour -- which "occurs just when one is least expecting it, and in the most improbable of places' -- see PT 261 §§ 438-9, RB 229a with n.2, 311. On the relation between the archetype of light-bringer and Christ as servator mundi, "the Saviour and Preserver of the world", 558 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE see e.g. AS 127 §§162-3 (cf. also 247-50 §§299-303). For the Gnostic figure, "suppressed and forgotten", of the cosmic Christ as Saviour and light-bringer "who went forth from the Father ... and its immediate relevance to Jungian psychology see SZ 671-2 §§1514-17, 826-9 §§1827-34. "3 See especially JP 113 for Jung's own important unpublished statement; also B. Hannah, Quadrant 16 (Spring 1974) 27 with Jung, his life and work (New York 1976) 53, 114 and J. Dehing, JAP 35 (1990) 379 with G. Quispel in The rediscovery of Gnosticism, ed. B. Layton, i (Leiden 1980) 21, 23. I am grateful, as well, to Gilles Quispel for personal comments he made to me on several occasions about things said to him in private by Jung. On the aliveness of the Gnostics compare also the exquisitely profound and funny story told by Jung about his good friend, the famous Gnostic expert G.R.S. Mead (JP 195-6). On the Gnostics as psychologists see in particular Aion 174 §269 ("for the Gnostics -- and this is their real secret -- the psyche existed as a source of knowledge"), 222 §347 ("it is clear beyond a doubt that many of the Gnostics were nothing other than psychologists"), 223 §350. "4 For gnésis as -- by definition -- a matter of direct knowledge or realization instead of belief see e.g. E. Pagels, Zhe Gnostic gospels (New York 1979) xix-xx; W. Barnstone and M. Meyer, The Gnostic bible (Boston 2003) 8-9 (on the recent trends towards "de-constructing" ancient Gnosticism as a recognizable phenomenon, cf. ibid. 12-16). With archetypal perversity Robert Segal opens his book on The Gnostic Jung by stating that "The belief known as Gnosticism is definable in various ways" (Princeton 1992, 3). On the surprising realities of ancient "heresy" and "orthodoxy" see the foundational work by Walter Bauer, Rechtglaubigkeit und Ketzeret im altesten NOTES TO PAGES 1447147 559 Christentum (2° ed., Tubingen 1964) = Orthodoxy and heresy in earliest Christianity (Philadelphia 1971), H. Koester, Harvard theological review 58 (1965) 279-318 and DJ. Harrington, ibid. 73 (1980) 289-98; B.A. Pearson, Gnosticism, Judaism and Egyptian Christianity (Minneapolis 1990) 194-213; A. Bohlig and C. Markschies, Gnosis und Manichaismus (Berlin 1994) 170; P. McKechnie, Journal of ecclesiastical history 47 (1996) 413 -- 14, For Jung's own clear statements regarding the matter see e.g. CS 14, where he explains that Gnosticism derives directly from the unconscious while Christianity derives in turn from Gnosticism; PA 357 §453; J. Dehing, JAP 35 (1990) 380. For the Gnostic perspective as the reverse of every ordinary perspective, or the other way around, cf. J.Z. Smith, Map is not territory (Leiden 1978) 151-71, Reality 417, 588. © On the underlying link between the words gnéstikos, gnésis, gignéskein and the immediacy of sense perception see e.g. Empedocles frs. 5.3 and 89 Diels = frs. 10.6 and 130.2 Gemelli Marciano; Reality 551-4, 591. "Psychology is concerned ... faculty of seeing": PA 13-14 §§14-15. Very significantly, in struggling to answer Martin Buber's accusations that he was a Gnostic, Jung is pulled straight back to the word's original meaning: "What Buber misunderstands as Gnosticism is psychiatric observation" (JL ii 570, cf. PR 307 §460). "6 Letter written by Jung to J.B. Lang on 9 March 1918. The letter as a whole remains unpublished but the central part of the text has been printed, with no comment, at RBu 209a; I have added an exact date for it based on the details mentioned by Jung, in the original letter, just above his signature. It will be noted that, although he refers to the "Erkenntnissinhalt der Gnosis und des Neoplatonismus", by Neoplatonism he meant what today would be called Hermetic or occult philosophy (PA 560 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE 83-4 §109 with n.38, PR 97 §159, JZ i 317, MC 309 § 425; cf. PJB 68-9). The language that Jung uses throughout the letter is highly significant. His mention of "the unconscious spirit" is a clear reference to the philosophy of Eduard von Hartmann (J/P 4-5; D.N.K. Darnoi, The unconscious and Eduard von Hartmann, The Hague 1967, 19, 56 with n.2). But at the same time his conscious or unconscious choice of words here in explaining how he wants to use Gnostic systems to create ("bilden") the foundations for "einer Lehre des Ubw Geistes" is strangely reminiscent of the familiar phrase "Lehre vom Hl. Geist", which instead of "theory" means "teaching" or "doctrine" of the Holy Spirit (cf. Jung himself, /P 384, with e.g. H. Leisegang, Der Heilige Geist i, Leipzig 1919, 3 on "der Ausbildung einer Lehre vom Heiligen Geiste"). And, if anything, it's even more reminiscent of the standard language used in Jung's time -- a language with which he was intimately familiar -- for describing the creation of those ancient Gnostic systems themselves. See e.g. W. Schultz, Dokumente der Gnosis (Jena 1910) 135 on "das Bild dieser Lehre", referring to the original system created by Simon Magus; 152, on Basilides together with "seine Lehre von der 'grofSen Unwissenheit", and, on the crucial importance of Schultz's book for Jung, L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search Jor roots (Los Angeles 2013) 17-20. In short, publicly he might insist that "psychology is concerned with the act of seeing and not with the construction of new religious truths" (P4 13-14 §15); in private, though, he may have been sailing a little close to the wind with regard to that bit about not constructing religious truths. '7 "Gnostic coloration": MDR 176/182; cf. JP 24. On Jung's choice of language to describe the utter terror of encountering his teacher, the total foreignness of the world he found himself plunged in, and his panic when faced "once again" ("wieder NOTES TO PAGES 147-149 561 einmal") with the catastrophic prospect of total craziness, see JP 175: the words "once again" refer back to the previous page where Jung had just described, using very similar terms, the sheer terror of having to clutch at the table in front of him to prevent himself from falling apart (JP 173-4). On his use of the word "Unsinn" here in the Protocols as indicator of a psychotic state compare ETG 131-4, 181-2, Red book folios ii verso and iv recto (RBu 234-5, 240b), and the Grimm brothers' classic entry in their Deutsche Wérterbuch. It will be noted that Jaffé does allow an element of fear to remain at this point in Jung's published biography -- but safely removed from the saintly guru-figure, Philemon (WDR 176-7/183 -- 4). On Philemon's "Egyptian -- Gnostic -- Hellenistic" background see JP 23 -- 4: one of the best pointers to what Jung meant by this term is the subtitle of the work which was his most trusted early guidebook to the Hermetica, Richard Reitzenstein's Potmandres ("Studien zur griechisch -- adgyptischen und frithchristlichen Literatur', Leipzig 1904). For the terror experienced by students, in Hermetic tradition, on first encountering their inner teacher see e.g. Corpus hermeticum 1.7-8 (tremein ... en ekpléxei mou ontos: Reitzenstein 329-30); for the total foreignness or alienness of the situation in which they suddenly find themselves, 13.3 (allotrios huios: Reitzenstein 340); for the panic at the prospect of going crazy, 13.4 -- 6 (eis manian me ouk oligén kai oistrésin phrenén eneseisas ... meména ontés, 6 pater: Reitzenstein 341). On the background to Corpus hermeticum 1 and 13 see PJB 41-76 and 17 -- 40 respectively; and for the almost perfect interpenetration of Gnostic and Hermetic traditions in Hellenistic Egypt cf. ibid. 22 -- 4, 42 n.1, 48-50 with n.20. As for Aniela Jaffé's motives in stripping such unpleasant features out of Jung's account, one only needs to remember her alleged statement that anything and everything should remain unpublished if "it doesn't throw a good light on Jung" (Jolande 562 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE Jacobi interview, JB4; R. Noll, The Jung cult, 24 ed., New York 1997, 286 and The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 278). 8 Philemon a Gnostic: JP 174-5 (repeated for emphasis); cf. also 113 (Philemon is one of the Gnostics). Even at JP 23-4 Jung repeats himself about Philemon's Gnostic affiliation; a comparison with the revised wording at DR 175-6/182 shows how pointedly, here too, his original emphasis has been watered down. Now of course, since the publication of Jung's own words in the Red book identifying Philemon with the famous Gnostic Simon Magus, any lingering uncertainties should already be a thing of the past (RB 359b; L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots, Los Angeles 2013, 17-27). But, as Lance Owens shrewdly observes, there are very strong forces at work in maintaining what he calls the Jungian "amnesis of Gnosis". For the increasingly institutionalized custodians and propagators of Jung's work "there was obviously no professional profit in nominating Jung as a Gnostic prophet" and now, more than ever, "it remains problematic to associate a school of clinical psychology with a widely anathematized heresy intimately entangled in the origins of Christianity" (ibid. 7-8). 4 "Critical disidentification": RB 207a, 218a, 310 n.252; S. Shamdasani, C.G. Jung: a biography in books (New York 2012) 104-7; J. Hillman and Shamdasani, Lament of the dead (New York 2013) 19-20, 107-9. Interestingly, in this constant talk about critical disidentification there is no real emphasis on the fact that the disidentification was initiated and managed by Philemon himself -- as an essential phase of his teaching that every single thought of ours is an independent and intelligent being (JP 24-5; MDR 176/183). Thought-experiments and ventriloquism: RB 223-4, IJ/P xii. Of course one ofthe biggest problems with the comfortable rational view of Jung as first NOTES TO PAGES 149-151 563 and foremost a scientist performing his experiments, magically immune from the danger of falling into a psychosis, is the awkward fact that this is nothing but the convenient narrative offered by his or our egoic no. 1 personality. From a deeper point of view he was never conducting any experiments on the unconscious but, rather, the unconscious was conducting its experiments on him (MDR 172/178, KI 8, "Jung felt that the unconscious had done an experiment on him"). As Jung repeated consistently until the very end of his life, it's not a question of what we do with the archetypes but of the use that the archetypes make of us; and, at bottom, this brings us back to the way he criticized even his own pupils for being superstitious enough to believe in free will when any such free will is just an illusion (JZ ii 626). At the same time, his mention of being not so much the experimenter as the one being experimented on is also a crucial nod on Jung's part towards the Hermetic "character of that spirit or thinking which you do not, like an intellectual operation, perform yourself, as the 'little god of this world', but which happens to you as though it came from another, and greater, perhaps the great spirit of the world" (MC 233 §313). For the same paradox of being analyzed by "the unconscious guide that dwells within yourself" and is "the analyst in your heart", which Jung saw as the end result of any psychoanalysis, see Shamdasani, Journal of sandplay therapy 24/1 (2015) 8-9. °° Protege me protegam te... Ego gigno lumen, tenebrae autem naturae meae sunt. Me igitur et filio meo coniuncto nil melius ac venerabilius in mundo frert potest. The Hermetic text was first published, with this precise wording, in the Rosarium philosophorum (Frankfurt 1550) and reprinted in the Artis auriferae volumen secundum, which was the version most used by Jung (Basle 1593, 239-40: for his purchase of the book see JP 564 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE 175; MDR 195-6/204; T. Fischer, J//S 3, 2011, 170-2). He was intimately familiar with every intricacy of this passage (cf. PA 109-10 with n.17, 118 with n.29), and it will be noted that on the Bollingen mural he skipped a sentence just before the final announcement about the merging of father and son -- obviously because that final statement is what mattered to him most. For very sketchy accounts of the mural see RB 317 n.282 and L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 24 with 286 n.86; for the poorest of reproductions, Man and his symbols, ed. C.G. Jung (New York 1964) 198 and D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) facing p.371. The painting of Philemon in the Red book: RB 154. >! On the subtitle to Jung's final and culminating work about alchemy ("An inquiry into the separation and synthesis of psychic opposites in alchemy") see MC v -- vi; JL 11 469-71. Philemon as father, Jung as son: RB 348-56; during their conversations about the Red book in 1924, Jung and Cary de Angulo still refer to Philemon as Father (draft letter to Jung dated 26 January 1924, RB 213b; CBA). »? For the BBC interview see H. Purcell, 4 very private celebrity (London 2015) 147-9; JS 428 (cf. also 374); JZ ii 520-3 with n.1, 524 -- 6. Philemon's words to Jung: RB 348b. Shamdasani points out that these words of Philemon provide the obvious background for Jung's famous comment in the interview, and even notes that the central emphasis here on direct experience as opposed to creeds or beliefs is in perfect agreement with ancient Gnostic teaching (ibid. 348 n.89) -- just as Paul Bishop accurately observes that "analytical psychology is structured at a deep level by the key opposition that characterizes Gnosticism', namely the opposition between direct knowledge and belief (Jung's Answer to Job', Hove 2002, 53). But unfortunately NOTES TO PAGES I51 -- 153 565 this hasn't prevented either of them from misrepresenting, elsewhere, the crucial nature of the relationship between conventional religions and Jungian psychology (JAP 44, 1999, 542 -- 4 and RB 212a with n.177; Morphologie und Moderne, ed. J. Maatsch, Berlin 2014, 164 with n.30, denying that Jung's "project" was religious on the grounds that Jung denied the importance of belief). For the clearest evidence, which has been available a long time, that Jung's insistent favouring of knowledge or scio over belief or credo is motivated at root by profoundly mystical considerations see his passionate letter to Bernhard Baur -- Celio dated 30 January 1934 (JZ i 140-2). Here he opens up about the terrifying (141 with n.4) experiences of direct knowing which had overwhelmed him, about the mysteries of initiation, and about the absolute taboo on saying too much. 53 Good examples of Jung marking up passages about spiritual rebirth, spiritual father and spiritual son can be found in his personal copies of Richard Reitzenstein's Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen (Leipzig 1910, 25-7, cf. also 44-5) and especially Albrecht Dieterich's Eine Mithrasliturgie (2TM ed., Leipzig 1910, 138-56, cf. 5). On the ancient adoption procedures that lie behind these traditions see IDPW, and on the equally ancient convention of magician as "father" teaching his "son" cf. APMM 221 with n.12, 374. For the passage "I see myself to be the All ..." see Corpus hermeticum 13.11, plainly marked by Jung in his edition of Walter Scott's Hermetica i (Oxford 1924) 247; for his own experience at Bollingen, MDR 213-14/225- -- 6 (note how effortlessly, here, Jung merges and unites with Philemon as both old man and son). On Philemon's copy of the Hermetic texts see RB 312a and, on Jung's dedication of Bollingen as sacred to Philemon, JL i 49; JH 2/2 (2007) 6; JP 297, MDR 222/235 n.5. 566 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE >4 "A typical Goethean answer ...": letter to Alice Raphael dated 7 June 1955 (Alice Raphael papers, Beinecke Library, Yale University). Shamdasani is to be commended for first publishing this letter (JH 2/2, 2007, 6-7) but his notes and even transcription are quite unusable; Latin, for instance, is not German and homo altus is not an old man. Goethe's own reply can be found in J.P. Eckermann, Gesprache mit Goethe (Leipzig 1836) ii 348-9 = Conversations of Goethe with Eckermann and Soret (London 1850) ii 399 (6 June 1831): for a much more clearly stated example of Goethe hiding his own vestiges by "enveloping himself in mystery" see ibid. ii 171 = ii 210 (10 January 1830), and for Jung's impression of Goethe as revealed by Eckermann cf. JZ ii 452-3. On the characters of Philemon and Baucis in the ancient world cf. Ovid, Metamorphoses 8.611 -- 724; M. Beller, Philemon und Baucis in der europdischen Literatur (Heidelberg 1967); B. Louden, Homer's 'Odyssey' and the Near East (Cambridge 2011) 19, 30-56, 280-313; HS. Versnel, Coping with the gods (Leiden 2011) 42-3 with n.71; and N. Schwartz -- Salant's observations, Cahiers jungiens de psychanalyse 134 (2011) 105. For Jung's comments about being ready to give the whole of the earth just to be able to know what Goethe knew, see JZ i 310. Regarding ancient traditions about the crucial importance of understanding one's teacher's name, compare especially the issues surrounding the origin and meaning of the name Poimandyres in the first of the Hermetica (Corpus hermeticum 1, PJB 41 -- 76, on name as essence cf. RB 282b, 315a). Parallels between Jung's Philemon and the Hermetic Poimandres have already been noted, in passing, by others (J. Hubback, JAP 11, 1966, 97, 105). >> A lot can be learned from comparing the exact expressions Jung uses in his attack on Martin Buber at SZ 665 §1505 with the beautiful summaries at JP 24 or MDR 176/183 of that NOTES TO PAGES 156-159 567 extraordinary knowledge -- about psychological objectivity, about the reality of the psyche, about the complete autonomy of thoughts and fantasies -- which he had received as gifts from Philemon. For the teaching Parmenides was given in the underworld about thoughts, perceptions and existence see Reality 60-199. And for Parmenides' own affinities with later Gnostic tradition cf. e.g. ibid. 198-9, 576 with J. Mansfeld's crude but well-intentioned efforts in Studies in Gnosticism and Hellenistic religions, ed. R. van den Broek and M.J. Vermaseren (Leiden 1981) 261-314. >6 On Jung's deep sense of the ideas that came to him through the Seven sermons as "really quite wonderful things" which caused him no end of struggle "until I could read their [not "this", as mistranscribed at both JZ i 42 and RB 215a] symbolic language, so much superior to my dull conscious mind" see his letter to Henry Murray dated 2 May 1925 (Papers of Henry A. Murray, Harvard University Archives). For their crucial, and continuing, importance to him cf. also JL i 33-4, MDR 182 -- 4/189-92; JSB 100-2; L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 6-7; A. Yiassemides, Time and timelessness (Hove 2014) 4. For the Gnostic elements in the Seven sermons, including the fact that Jung ascribed their authorship to the Gnostic Basilides, see e.g. E.M. Brenner, JAP 35 (1990) 397-419; Owens 25-7. On Jung's continued immersion in Gnostic literature well into the 1950s see Ribi 130-47. For his public disavowal of the Seven sermons at SL 663 -- 4 §1501 as "hardly a very candid or courageous statement", as "less than fully candid", see J.P. Dourley in Jung and the monotheisms, ed. J. Ryce- -- Menuhin (London 1994) 129 and On behalf of the mystical fool (Hove 2010) 70. Lance Owens has also, very discreetly, pointed out in a note what utter nonsense Jung is speaking when he attacks Buber for drawing unfair attention 568 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE "to a sin of my youth": he had written the Seven sermons when he was in his forties, authorized an English translation when he was approaching fifty and kept on giving out copies long after (Owens 280 n.17, quoting from SZ 663 §1501). But there is a far more significant aspect to Jung's characterization of this work as "a sin of my youth" than simple chronology, and the fact that it seems to have been overlooked is no positive testimony to modern Jung scholarship. What appears to have gone completely unnoticed is the way he is quoting an Old Testament psalm that begs the Lord God for love and, above all, forgiveness of every old sin because "my hope is in you all day long" -- I ache now to take refuge in you and learn what is right so, please Lord, "do not remember the sins of my youth and my rebellious ways" (Psalms 25:4-7). That Jung, whose intimate familiarity with every detail of the Bible amazed even the theologians of his time, was unaware of exactly what is implied in appealing to such an emotive Jewish text while addressing such a prominent Jewish authority as Martin Buber is out of the question. But of course the reality is that, in spite of sending this subtle message of repentance and apology for the error of his Gnostic ways, Jung wasn't repenting of anything: never would. And it would be only too easy to add to that Gnostic sin the additional sins of religious hypocrisy and brazen fraud. For his extraordinary knowledge of the Bible cf. e.g. [JW 7 together with his own remarkable statement, about the absolute need for such knowledge, at JV i 442. As for the time-honoured practice, forgotten now but still well known to Jung, of quoting a brief word or phrase from a scriptural text to evoke an entire context see APMM 42-5, 52-3, Reality 64-5, 96-7, 222-8, 332-3, 524 -- 6; and compare his own comment in JL i 426. NOTES TO PAGES 159-162 569 57 For Jung lamenting his own moral cowardice, and bourgeois desire for peace and tranquillity, see JZ ii 155-6. Denouncing his "medieval-minded critics" for denouncing him "as a mystic and Gnostic": J. Dehing, JAP 35 (1990) 381. Empedocles and Jung's dual view of the psyche: ZZ 78-9 §§200-3 (cf. 70 §179, 83 §§217-18). 8 Hermes' lies: Homeric hymn to Hermes 368-9; L. Kahn, Hermes passe (Paris 1978); Reality 460, 589. Popes: Saint Gregory the Great, Morahia 3.28.55 (sic in facto rem approbat, ut in mysterio contradicat; sic gesta damnat, ut haec mystice gerenda suadeat), E. Wind, Pagan mysteries in the Renaissance (2TM ed., London 1968) 27 n.; Reality 417. For such inversions in ancient Gnosticism see e.g. J.Z. Smith, Map is not territory (Leiden 1978) 151-71. Jung was not only very familiar with such paradoxical reversals but also practised them himself, for example characterizing the intensely anti-Gnostic Saint Hippolytus "as a secret Gnostic who concealed his allegiance under the guise of opposition" (A. Ribi, The search for roots, Los Angeles 2013, 132). >? Scholarship, personality no. 1 and the spirit of our time: see e.g. Red book, folio ii verso (RB 233b); JP 300. For the spirit of the time assuming itself to be ever so clever, see RB 237a. Scholars as murderers: RB 230b. David Miller channels the spirit of our time to perfection when he warns other scholars against presenting Jung in a Gnostic context because this inevitably "lends an esoteric and mystical aura to Jung and his thinking, which makes serious academic thinkers and teachers suspicious" (Teaching Jung, ed. K. Bulkeley and C. Weldon, New York 2011, 42). And, from his own angle, Barry Jeromson 570 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE is content to cite Jung's very public reply to Martin Buber as reassuringly definitive proof that he never considered himself in any way a Gnostic (JH 2/2, 2007, 25-6). But, tellingly, the more that Jeromson tries to maintain this position the deeper he sinks into distortions and misunderstandings: to call symbolic works such as Seven sermons to the dead "religious allegories for a psychological process" is to ignore Jung's clear and repeated distinction between allegory and symbol (PT' 474 §815, ST'77 §114, 222 §329, Aion 72-3 §127), while to define the ultimate purpose of his entire work as "psychological, not religious" (for this simplistic scholarly parody of Jung cf. e.g. R.A. Segal, JAP 40, 1995, 601) is to show the crudest disregard for Jung's own desperate insistence that nothing in the universe is more religious than the study of the human psyche and that people who haven't personally experienced the truth of this are fools to think they have any right at all to talk about religion (PA 3-37). For academics' growing love affair with Jung see e.g. D. Tacey, JAP 42 (1997) 269-83 and in Who owns Jung?, ed. A. Casement (London 2007) 53-71. On his general disaffection with professional scholars compare for example RB 264, 312b, SM 58 §86, JL i 530-1, JP 351; E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 213-14. And note his profoundly significant comments in 1952 about how -- just as "alchemy is a secret knowledge that collided with the orthodox position and as a result was forced to vegetate in the darkness" -- so "we with our psychology would also have to live in the catacombs, as it were, if the academies and other well-intentioned authorities had any power. Oh yes, if that was the case I would already have been burned at the stake long ago. Then I would have been roast beef" (Bausteine, ed. A. Schweizer and R. Schweizer -- Viillers, Einsiedeln 2017, 218; the crucial statement here is almost predictably mistranslated in the English edition, Stone dy stone, ed. Schweizer and Schweizer -- Viillers, Finsiedeln 2017). Ever NOTES TO PAGES 162-163 571 so often Jung would point to the existence of the occasional "true" scholar, or seeker, but only to make the point that most so-called scholars in their destructive one-sidedness are not true scholars at all (letter to Wilfrid Lay dated 20 April 1946, CBA = JL i 425). The unnanounced dangers of hearing or seeing our own views reflected back to us: Reality 422-9. °° For Jung on the Gnostic use of paradoxes and contradictions see e.g. PR 275 §§ 416-18. In his sensitivity to this he is well ahead of his time, and R.A. Segal's clumsy attempt at severing Gnosticism from the use of paradox (SFJT 13/2, Summer 1994, 64) could easily have been prevented by referring to the text known as Thunder, perfect mind which was discovered at Nag Hammadi (codex 6.2.13.1-21.32; W. Barnstone and M. Meyer, The Gnostic bible, Boston 2003, 226-32). 'True to form, soon after applauding Gnostics for avoiding hubris or inflation through their use of contradictory and paradoxical language, Jung goes on to contradict himself by denouncing them for their "fatal inflation" (PR 275 §417, 287 §§ 438-9: for hubris as inflation cf. e.g. JZ ii 16, MDR 221/234); scholars are quick to note the link between Gnosticism and inflation in the second of these passages while strangely overlooking the contrary statement in the first. Jung is "clear beyond a doubt" that the Gnostics were psychologists (dion 222 §347, cf. 223 §350) but also doubts that they were psychologists ("DR 192/201): Segal's feeble effort to "reconcile" these contradictory statements by explaining that, according to Jung, the Gnostics "felt unfulfilled" (Zhe Gnostic Jung, Princeton 1992, 34-5) is an insult both to the Gnostics and to Jung. As with the alchemists, Jung was never quite able to decide in which respects the Gnostics were much more primitive than us and in which respects they were far more advanced (Aion 190 §297). And he shows similar uncertainty when he admits that it was his 572 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE personal experiences which brought him to the Gnostics in the first place, acknowledges that their writings are based without the slightest doubt on their own experiences, but worries about how many metaphysical assumptions they allowed to creep into their teachings and even accuses them of being full-fledged metaphysicians (B. Hannah, Jung, his life and work, New York 1976, 114; JZ i 553, 11 53-5, 245, 290; J. Dehing, JAP 35, 1990, 380). Of course this whole issue is greatly complicated, but also vastly simplified, by the fact that behind his brash denials of being a metaphysician he was terrified to come clean about his own unshakeable fascination with metaphysics (J/P 12, 50; JL ii 344; J. Dourley, JAP 47, 2002, 485). For the constant uncertainties of personality no. 1 see e.g. JP 302 (also RB 254 n.238, on the spirit of this time); for its addiction to lying, MDR 55/45. * R.EC. Hull in A.C. Elms, Uncovering lives (New York 1994) 59; cf. D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 640, 842-3 n.157. For the dismissal of Hull as an intellectual by Marie-Louise von Franz and Barbara Hannah in particular, see e.g. S. Shamdasani in Who owns Jung?, ed. A. Casement (London 2007) 184-5 n.17. M. Saban (How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and M. Stein, Hove 2013, 18) is correct to emphasize how eager those around Jung were to dull the sharp edge of his dual personalities by exchanging them for "a more familiar Jungian narrative", and how quickly von Franz in particular was seduced into rationalizing them by trying to make any contradictions disappear; but he seems not to go so far as to recognize the utter absurdity of von Franz's assertion that, while Jung was already a young man, "he once and for all renounced any kind of identification with no. 2" (C.G. Jung: his myth in our time, New York 1975, 41). NOTES TO PAGES 163-165 573 62 Jung even cites in support of this the authority of Khidr, the most mysterious of Sufi prophets: ACU 144-6 §§253 -- 4, M. Stein in How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and Stein (Hove 2013) 38. Of course he openly admits that secrecy had been the most essential component of his whole life ever since earliest childhood (MDR 30-65/17-56, 235/249 -- 50). Bollingen and personality no. 2: see especially JP 297; MDR 214/225. On his profound dislike for talking publicly about the Gnostics, note his awkward comments about being "manoeuvred" during the presentation of the famous Nag Hammadi Jung codex in November 1953 into saying a few truthful words about the relationship between his psychology and ancient Gnosticism (JW 223 = JL ii 138); Gilles Quispel plausibly reports that before the event "a number of women in his entourage tried to persuade him not to attend" because "they feared Jung would be branded a Gnostic, whereas they wanted to present their hero as a meticulous scholar and scientist" (Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica, Leiden 2008, 151-2: compare the Jung household's dedication to stopping him being called a mystic, [JW 46). But the most revealing account of Jung's discomfort at the publicity surrounding his involvement with the Gnostic codex, and of the immense relief he felt when the speech he gave about its profound psychological significance was ignored by the press, is his own letter to Cary Baynes dated 30 November 1953 (CBA). Here he explains that although he himself was overjoyed at the recovery of such fascinating original material, with its enormous implications for how we understand ancient Gnosticism and its history, there is almost nobody who appreciates the realities involved: very pointedly he adds that even the so-called experts at the event such as Carl Meier or Quispel himself were talking nothing but "hot air", and that he detested the entire performance. On the 574 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE aura of secrecy with which he surrounded the Seven sermons, in particular, note Michael Fordham's personal reminiscence about only people who had reached "a suitably 'advanced' stage" receiving a copy of the work after being "sworn to secrecy about it" (RB 215 n.197); for similar traditions of secrecy in the ancient world cf. APMM 289-90, 365-6 n.20. Regarding the "secret knowledge" that Jung was finally forced, as the result of a major illness during his seventies, to deposit inside the only major book in which he ever allowed Gnosticism to take centre stage see M. Ostrowski -- Sachs, From conversations with C.G. Jung (Zurich 1971) 68; L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 29-32; for Jung and "secret knowledge" cf. also JE i 140-2 with the introductory note at 140. Again there is nothing coincidental about the fact that through the struggle to write this book, called Aion, he found himself reunited with Philemon on an even deeper level after a period of over thirty years (JZ i 480-1, 491-2 = JW 103-4, 116-18; Owens, PP 54, 2011, 278-9). On Jung's gradual awakening to the personal significance, for him, of Mani's ancient teaching about the central importance of being reunited with one's higher self or celestial twin see Quispel, SFT 13/2 (Summer 1994) 47; and, on this Manichaean teaching about reunion, A. Bohlig and C. Markschies, Gnosis und Manichaismus (Berlin 1994) 268 with C.M. Stang, Our divine double (Cambridge, MA 2016). 3 Empedocles' dual spirits: Reality 347-473; and for Jung's spirit of the depths as also too powerful for humans to bear cf. e.g. RB 238b. On the two halves of Parmenides' poem see Reality 55-294 and, for science as belonging to the world of illusion, 212-58; PSIE 229-36, 274-5. The inadequacy of Jung's two spirits and the need for balance between their two madnesses: RB 238b (and compare, again, RB 298a on NOTES TO PAGES 165-169 575 the madness that unavoidably attaches itself to every aspect of our daily existence). Empedocles' two madnesses: Caelius Aurelianus, Chronic diseases 1.5; Reality 438-41. The spirit of this time, with its overwhelming fascinations and seductions, as "the general spirit in which we think and act today": RB 240a; compare Reality 422-87. "In order to illuminate the stupidity 2) SL 671 §§1515, 827 §§1827. "In not expecting the darkness ...": E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 176. *4 Philemon's appearance: RB 312-14. "Jung first goes to him to learn magic, which is an interesting critical theme in the work that doesn't ever really surface in his public writings": 8. Shamdasani, JAP 55 (2010) 41-2. The Red book as seedbed: JP 144, 147, 149, 177, 258; MDR 184/192, 190-1/199. Philemon as Christ's friend: BB vi 85; RB 316b with n.280, 359 with n.153. *5 Jung searches for Philemon the magician: RB 311-12, and compare Reality 326 -- 41 on the ancient tradition of having to realize one's complete stuckness before setting out in search of the wise magician. For the vital importance to Jung of Goethe's Faust, and the devastating impact on him of the scene where Faust's inflated hubris leads to the murder of Philemon and Baucis, see especially MDR 221-2/234-5. According to Ovid, as Jung knew very well (RB 315a, PA 480 §561), Philemon and Baucis' cottage was saved by being transformed into a magnificent temple of the gods; but this, in spite of the Faustian attempt by Wolfgang Giegerich to force an "atheistic" interpretation on Ovid's tale (Spring 1984, 63-4), is just another way of removing it completely from our human existence. °¢ Jung's favourite form of respectable denial was to complain that the "funny prejudice" of labelling him an occultist just 576 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE because the nature of his work obliged him to study the occult, of course in a purely professional capacity, was as ridiculous as if one were to accuse a criminologist of being a criminal or a medical expert on sexual perversions of being a sexual pervert. This rhetorical argument also became very popular, as a way of defending him against all sorts of accusations, among Jung's family and followers alike. See e.g. JZ ii 186 (Jung denying he was an occultist); SZ 730 §1647 (using the same argument to deny he was a Gnostic); [JW 46 (others insisting that of course he was no mystic himself because, quite matter-of- factly, "there was a need to know about things mysterious and he was the guy who was doing the research where it had to be done"). And continuing in the same direction he went to even greater lengths to dissociate himself from Paracelsus because, although a direct "forerunner of our modern psychology of the unconscious", the doctor had dabbled so extensively in magic (AS 116-22 §§151-6, 189 §§237- -- 8). For a recent addition to the inconclusive, and mostly inconsequential, scholarly debate over Jung's status as a modern esotericist see R. Main in Sacral revolutions, ed. G. Heuer (Hove 2010) 167~75. °" The sentence he chose was exaphes ho echeis kai tote lépsei, "Let go of what you have and then you will receive". See the heading of his letter to Freud dated 31 August 1910 = F] 387 with Faksimile 8 ("mystische Anweisung aus einem Pariser Zauberpapyrus"), and [JP 51 with MDR 179/186; S. Shamdasani, C.G. Jung: a biography in books (New York 2012) 65-8. Jung came across, and heavily underscored, the saying in his own copy of Albrecht Dieterich's Eine Mithrasliturgie (2° ed., Leipzig 1910, 21.1-2, 84): see also now Papyri graecae magicae i (2TM ed., ed. K: Preisendanz and A. Henrichs, Stuttgart 1973) 100-1 (PGM IV.828) with M. Meyer in Mystery and secrecy in the Nag Hammadi collection and other NOTES TO PAGES 169-170 577 ancient literature, ed. C.H. Bull, L.I. Lied and J.D. Turner (Leiden 2012) 449-50. On the Paris magical papyrus (PGM IV) and Empedocles see APMM 221-3, 238-51, 286-8, 300- 14 with nn.37, 64 and 83, 374-5; ENM 391 with n.143. PGM IV and Parmenides: JDPW 129-32; ENM 390 n.140. And for the cultural as well as geographical details of how the magical and mystical material that would end up in PGM IV came to be transmitted from Sicily or Italy down to Egypt see P. Kingsley, JWCTI 57 (1994) 1-13; APMM 240-7, 268-70, 314-16, 325-34, 339-43, 374. Aside from his numerous errors in matters of detail, Richard Noll makes a commendably passionate effort to underscore the importance for Carl Jung of the ancient Greek magical papyri (Spring 53, 1994, 46-8 n.11). "The great Paris magical papyrus" in particular would retain its hallowed status for him to the end of his life (cf. MC 196 §§251-2; JS 434). °8 For Jung's analysis of the three possibilities open to a human when confronting the "mana-personality" or magician archetype, see TE 227 -- 41 §§374 -- 406. "Assimilate": ibid. 237 §398 ("dissolution of the mana -- personality through conscious assimilation of its contents"). Also compare 230 §382, where Jung answers the question of "what happens" during this process to the magical power itself -- far from being lost or left behind it's simply transferred, intact, from the grip of the ego into the hands of the higher Self -- and contrast his vivid description of how anyone who fails on a conscious level to integrate and assimilate the archetype of the magician is simply gobbled up by it (JP 147). For a fine introduction to the mythical theme of swallowing and devouring magical powers as a way of assimilating or integrating them inside oneself, see M. Detienne and J.-P. Vernant, Les ruses de l'intelligence (Paris 1974) 61-124. Aside from adding "assimilation" as a key word to his psychological vocabulary (cf. esp. PPT 151-6 §§326-38), 578 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE Jung himself was perfectly aware of its significance on a mythical level in denoting the absorption of magical power: in fact he often made a very deliberate point of emphasizing the mythical and psychological parallels. See e.g. TE 228 §376 with ST'183 §268, 339 n.57 ("overpowers the gods in order to assimilate their divine nature and become their lord") and n.58 ("the initiates assimilated the essence of the god"); PR 243 §371 ("assimilate the mana"), 275 §418; MC 292 §400, 308 §424, 364 §512 with n.394. These examples show beyond any doubt that, when Jung talks in his Two essays about "assimilating" the mana -- personality or magician archetype, he is at the same time describing a magical process. Compare also RB 314-17, where he presents the apparently psychological withdrawal of projections as an essential part of Philemon's magic. As for the widespread view among modern Jungian practitioners that along the path of individuation the arche- typal figure of the magician just has to be "seen through and confronted, making possible an exit from this realm" (J. Cambray, International journal of psychoanalysis 94, 2013, 417), this is a dangerously irresponsible rationalization of what Jung himself had been trying to convey. * No professors left who know anything about magic: RB 312-13. On magic as no longer a matter of outer ceremony or ritual or spells note for example the case of Jung's celebrated predecessor, the Swiss physician Paracelsus: C. Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton (Cambridge 1982) 58; D. Burton and D. Grandy, Magic, mystery and science (Bloomington, IN 2004) 37. For Philemon the "old magician" see RB 312, and note Lance Owens' comments in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 23, 285 n.81: Philemon was an old magician not only because of his age but because he was a reincarnation of the ancient magician Simon Magus (RB 359b, cf. 316a). NOTES TO PAGES 170-172 579 For Jung himself as "old magician" see Aniela Jaffé, From the life and work of C.G. Jung (2 ed., Einsiedeln 1989) 139 ("the approach of the old magician never lost its excitement in all those years. With my inner ear I still hear it to this day"); compare also Miguel Serrano's personal comments about "Jung, the magician" after meeting him in 1959 (C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse, London 1966, 61-4 and 92-3 = JS 464-5: "... I had the feeling that I was facing an incarnation of Abraxas ...") as well as his reminiscence of Ruth Bailey telling him how she had helped Jung "perform some rites" at Bollingen (Serrano 98). For Jung as a Gnostic see e.g. JJW 25 ("Kerenyi said that he believed Jung thought of himself as a 'kind of Pope ... of the Gnostics": Kerényi said this specifically about a Jung who was already in his eighties). And Gilles Quispel, too, was portraying not a scholar of Gnosticism but a living Gnostic when he described Jung as "the genius of the deep who, time and time again, shocked whoever listened to him with his relentlessly accurate perceptions and plumbed the very depths of Satan" (Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica, Leiden 2008, 15). For Jung as alchemist compare his more than humorous retort -- again in his eighties, when someone tries to talk about the eclipse and death of alchemy -- "But I am an alchemist and I am not dead!" (J//W 85). One only needs to add Warren Colman's refreshing admission that, in writing and working so directly from the unconscious, Jung "functions more like a Gnostic or an alchemist than a scientific psychologist" (JAP 42, 1997, 3.42). " Note especially the account of what happened one day when -- while drinking wine with Olga Frobe -- Kapteyn, founder of the annual Eranos gatherings -- "Jung carried out a ritual" in which he removed the ancient magic ring from his finger, "placed it in a glass filled with wine, uttered some mysterious 580 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE formulae, and then slipped the ring onto her finger. The next day Frébe said to him that he, as a psychologist, had done something grave with this gesture, and she told him: "You have bound me to you!' Jung, however, is said to have answered: 'It was not I that did it, but the Self"." She was deeply disturbed by the incident and remained troubled by it for years (cited with little understanding by H.T. Hakl: Eranos, Sheffield 2013, 45, 307 n.15; cf. also M. Eliade, Journal i, Chicago 1990, 161, 165 and R. Bernardini, Jung a Eranos, Milan 2011, 184-7). One might be tempted to dismiss this all as just a joke, but it certainly is not: according to Jung's own formal analysis the Self is precisely where, if only our ego can avoid identifying with the archetype of the magician or "mana -- personality", the real source and centre of gravity of its magic power will end up (TE 230 §382, 237-40 §§398 -- 405). On the intricate issue of Jung's ancient "Gnostic" ring see JV i 610-11; M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 49, 89 and 101 (cf. JS 468); L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 18-19, 279 n.12, 283 n.59. In 1932 Jung himself describes his special ring as "thoroughly alive and full of mana" (cf. also Serrano 101 = JS 468: "absolutely alive within me", spoken almost thirty years later) and significantly adds that to dismiss such statements as "not scientific" would be a mistake, because "science is just a corner of the world in comparison to the real world" (JV i 611). C.W. King's The Gnostics and their remains, well read by Jung (London 1864; cf. RB 349 n.93), has much to say about the magical figures of Agathodaimon and Abraxas on antique gems or rings like his. For the formal consecration of these rings see Papyri graecae magicae (2TM ed., ed. K. Preisendanz and A. Henrichs, Stuttgart 1973-74) i 124-7 (PGM 1V.1596-1715 = H.D. Betz, The Greek magical papyri in translation, 2°° ed., Chicago 1992, 68-9) and ii 71-6 (PGM X11.201-69 = Betz 161-3) with S. Eitrem, Symbolae NOTES TO PAGES 172-173 581 Osloenses 19 (1939) 57-85 and J. Dieleman, Priests, tongues and rites (Leiden 2005) 147-70: in fact even Jung's modification of his own ring to incorporate elements of Christian symbolism faithfully reflects established ancient practice (Serrano 101 = JS 468; Eitrem 82 -- 4). For Greek magical traditions about the "words to whisper over a wine cup' see e.g. J.J. Winkler in Magika hiera, ed. C.A. Faraone and D. Obbink (New York 1991) 223 with Faraone, Classical antiquity 15 (1996) 77-112 (who repeatedly cites both Empedocles and "Orphic" traditions in passing: 90-1, 103-8, 110, 112). And on the general practice of men "binding" women for friendship, loyalty or love, compare Faraone's Ancient Greek love magic (Cambridge, MA 1999); ENM 357-8, 395 (referring to Empedocles). It will also be noted that dropping a ring into wine to produce a magical effect would later play a major role in medieval Germanic tradition. See in particular J.B. Sherman, The magician in medieval German literature (PhD thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2008) 83-4, "King Princian also enchants Queen Salme with a magic ring by dipping it into her wine glass: ein fingerlin er in den win swang, dar nach trang die frauwe wol gethan ..." (cf. Salman und Morolf, ed. A. Karnein, Tiibingen 1979, 198 §604). 1 RB 140-4 (cf. 312-14). Although Jung emphasizes that magic and reason have nothing at all to do with each other from a rational point of view, he does add that reason has a certain usefulness for the magician when performing magic (ibid. 314). The soul's warning: RB 126, 128, 130 (cf. 307-8); it will be noted that the German word for "comfort" or "solace" ("Trost", "trostlos", "Trésterin", "tréste") occurs in this passage no less than fourteen times. For the ancient teacher's typical job of frustrating the student while destroying every comfortable hope or reassuring expectation, once again the classic and 582 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE absolutely crucial text is Corpus hermeticum 13 (P. Kingsley, Parabola 22/1, Spring 1997, 21-5; PJB 17-40; for this same disruptive aspect of training in shamanism see e.g. T. Nathan, Nouvelle revue d'ethnopsychiatrie 20, 1993, 47). Now one can begin to understand why, right at the start of the chapter in the Red book called "The magician", Jung emphasizes Philemon's familiarity with the wisdom of Hermes Trismegistus (139, cf, 312a). And with his following account of silence as "the best apprenticeship", and of real magic as something that can't be taught (140-8, cf. 313-15), compare specifically Corpus hermeticum 13.16: touto ou didasketai alla kruptetat en sigéi, "this can't be taught but is hidden in silence" (cf. W.C. Grese, Corpus hermeticum XIII and early Christian literature, Leiden 1979, 8-9, 14-15, 20-1, 24-5, 116-17, 157-8). " For Jung comparing the imminent destiny of his own psychology to the institutionalization of early Christianity, with the inevitable loss in both cases of the original spirit and fire, see CS 18-21; 8. Shamdasani's simplistic comments and contrasts (JAP 44, 1999, 541-2) ignore the crucial subtleties in what Jung was clearly trying to convey here. "It is a bewildering thing in human life that the thing that causes the greatest fear is the source of the greatest wisdom": DA 329. For Jung's plain and persistent warnings against thinking one can explain any aspect of his psychology -- or anything else -- in terms of "nothing but", see e.g. The psychogenesis of mental disease (2" ed., London 1972) 192 §423; TE 238 §400; PPT 46 §98; CT 168 §357; DP 83 §§156-7, 177 §302; SL 274 §627; PA 10 §11. 73 Everyone, without exception, is being eaten away by "the spirit that runs through the masses": AS 117-18 §153. For Jung's summary assessment of Jungians -- "analysts are not exceptional people', i.e. are no better able to understand what NOTES TO PAGES 173-179 583 really matters than anyone else -- see JK 157. On the academic eradication of Empedocles as magician by either falsifying or turning a blind eye to all the evidence see, for example, the rationalizing achievements of H. Diels, Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1898) 407-11 and B.A. van Groningen, Classica et mediaevalia 17 (1956) 47-61 with my comments in APMM, esp. 217-32; J.-C. Picot, Revue de philosophie ancienne 18 (2000) 25-86 with ENM 342 n.12, 351-8, 387-99. For the scholarly obliteration of Parmenides as magician see the evidence presented in [DPW; E'NM 379-80 with Reality 34-294, L. Gemelli Marciano, Ancient philosophy 28 (2008) 21-48 and PSIE. "Our time no longer needs magic": RB 314a. " The inscription: JL i 49; JP 297, MDR 222/235 n.5; T. Ziolkowski, The view from the tower (Princeton 1998) 145; Jung briefly touches on the dynamics of poenitentia in Aion 191-2 §299. He describes the inscription as "hidden" in his letter to Alice Raphael dated 7 June 1955 ("... in my tower in Bollingen is a hidden inscription: Philemonis sacrum Fausti poenitentia ...": Alice Raphael papers, Beinecke Library, Yale University; the published transcription at JH 2/2, 2007, 6 is inaccurate). With regard to the element of secrecy, it will be noted that even the Latin word sacrum itself had strong overtones of something "secret" (Lygdamus, ed. F.N. Antolin, Leiden 1996, 430; L.A. Fisher, The mystic vision in the Grail legend and in the 'Divine comedy', New York 1917, 63-5). For Jung's own association of shrine or sanctuary with secrecy see JL i 140-1 plus 140 n.1. > Jung as Faust: MDR 221-2/234-5; and cf. JL i 309-10. "It's a very long step ... a very different proposition": SZ 610- 11 §1396. "One virtually has to die": JB i 385 ("Man muf ja allerdings fast gestorben sein"), cf. JZ i 310; for Jung's reference 584 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE at the beginning of this letter as well as at JZ i 316 to sitting on the edge of a volcano compare JP 149, APMM 73-8, 239-40, 280, [DPW 68-9, 90 and especially JV i 594-7. Descent into hell and recognition of one's "complicity in the act of evil": RB 243b, 274b, 288-91; L.S. Owens and S.A. Hoeller in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2% ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 979. 76 The evil of the new: MDR 223 -- 4/235-7; JP 212-13. Vicious innovators: JP 213; and compare JZ i 309-10 on Philemon and Baucis alone standing up to the godforsaken ruthlessness of our present age. Faust's "hubris and inflation": ETG 238 (cf. MDR 221/234); see also PA 479-81 §§559-63, SZ 750 §1699. ' PA 480-1 §§561-3. Faust's inflation in having Philemon and Baucis killed and their cottage burned to the ground is linked to the collective inflation of Germany not only here but also in JL i 310; Jung's letter to Alice Raphael dated 7 June 1955, comparing "the great conflagration of German cities, where all the simple people burned to death" (JH 2/2, 2007, 6); MDR 221 -- 2/234 -- 5. The veiled but consistent accounts by Jung of his own penance do raise the question of whether the many people who have criticized him for what they believe to be his "moral deficit" (I owe this expression to Paul Bishop: Jung in contexts, London 1999, 17) understand anything at all about what he was trying in his life to do. 78 The magics of Mephistopheles and Merlin: JP 212-13. Remedying Faust's actions through "recognition of "the ancient" and by ensuring the continuity of history and culture: MDR 222/235 = JP 233 (although "intellectual history" is hardly satisfactory as a translation of "Geistesgeschichte", for preservation of cultural traditions cf. JP 212-13). Also NOTES TO PAGES 179-186 585 mentioned here is genuine respect for humans and their eternal rights -- but of course to be able to respect such rights supposes an insight into eternity. 79 For Jung's many-sidedness see e.g. PP 38 (1998) 33, JSB 39-42; on the ease of being swallowed up by the past, [JP 152. "We are a blinded and deluded race ... fail to hear the dead": RBu 296b (cf. RB 297b). "Annehmen" in Jung's German, for people's failure to "receive" or "honour" the dead, is mistranslated at RB 297b as "accept": compare the crucial role played, for Jung, by Philemon and Baucis in both receiving and honouring the gods (ibid. 315; P4 480 §§561-2). And more serious is the mistranslation, a few lines later, of "damit die Toten ihn entlassen" as "so that the dead will not let him' -- instead of "so that the dead will let him go free". 80 This is a very rough paraphrase of the magically evocative account by Jung which, together with Jaffé's instructive crossings out and revisions, still remains unpublished: JP 113. Throughout his life he kept emphasizing the need to get back, in every aspect of his work, to and beyond the beginnings of Christianity: compare e.g. PPT 82 §§188~9, "We are therefore forced to go back to pre-Christian and non- Christian conceptions ... Medieval physicians seem to have realized this, for they practised a philosophy whose roots can be traced back to pre-Christian times and whose nature exactly corresponds to our experiences with patients today", ST 3-5 §1. For the "treasure hard to attain" see ST; P4 117 §155, 158 §205, 170-1 §222, 335-46 §§438-48; PPT 82 §187; MC 531 §756. On Jung's early fascination with the Grail, note especially JP 160-1. And on his passion for archaeology see FJ 277 §157J (14 October 1909; cf. 270 §154F, 9 August 1909), 284 §159] (8 November), 307 §170J (25 December); JZ i 29, 113, 586 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE ii 307; DP 154 §262; PPT 45 §96, 50 §111; JS 209, 428, 457; MDR 79-90/72-84, 158/162. The name of Jung is strangely missing from recent literature on the topic of philosophical or psychological archaeology (e.g. G. Agamben, The signature of all things, New York 2009; J. Thomas in Contemporary archaeologies, ed. C. Holtorf and A. Piccini, Frankfurt 2009, 33-45; C. McQuillan, Parrhesia 10, 2010, 39-49), although work in progress by Paul Bishop is due to fill that gap. *! For alchemy as the crucial bridge back to the Gnostics see especially JP 176, 226, 228, MDR 192-3/201; for the imagery of the bridge compare e.g. ST'4 §1, JZ i 354, DP 145 §250 plus A.C. Lammers, In God's shadow (Mahwah 1994) 11-16; when referring to alchemy Jung also enjoyed using the English expression "missing link". 'The Gnostics who "lived in the first, second and third centuries ...": R.I. Evans, Jung on elementary psychology (New York 1976) 232, cf. JS 350. The dangers of losing one's head: MDR 170/176. The misunderstandings of Jung's statement that the Gnostics were too remote or distant from him (MDR 192/201, JP 175) have been legion (cf. e.g. R.A. Segal, The Gnostic Jung, Princeton 1992, 10; D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 370), but it means exactly what he says: they were too deep in the psyche or distant in time, and the link between them and him was missing. For the golden chain or, in Latin, aurea catena see especially P. Lévéque's classic work Aurea catena Homeri (Paris 1959); Jung refers to the chain at e.g. PA 114 n.24; JZ i 351 with n.3, ii 396; MC 254 §344; MDR 181/189, 196/205. It will be noted that this important image of a golden chain was transmitted from classical Greek antiquity not only into medieval western alchemy but also into Sufi tradition -- where, as the si/silat adh-dhahab, it came to play a crucial role for the Naqshbandi Sufi lineage in particular. See for example Mawlana 'Ali ibn Husain Safi, Beads of dew from NOTES TO PAGES 186-187 587 the source of life, trans. M. Holland (Fort Lauderdale 2001) 2, 31, 41-2; H. Algar, Die Welt des Islams 13 (1971) 191 with n.3; J.S. Trimingham, The Sufi orders in Islam (Oxford 1971) 150. For the devout, but futile attempts at providing an exclusively Islamic explanation of this imagery cf. M.H. Faghfoory in Shaykh Muhammad 'Ali Mu'adhdhin Sabzawari Khurdasani, Tubfah yi-Abbasi (Lanham 2008) xi; on the ancient "golden chain" or silsilat adh-dhahab of Greek philosophers as viewed through the eyes of later Arab alchemists see P. Lory, /adir ibn Hayyan, L'Elaboration de I'élixir supréme (Damascus 1988) 15; and for the underlying connections between Sufism and alchemy, APMM 66 with n.48, 386-91. 82 On alchemical tradition, for Jung, as fundamentally indistinguishable from Gnosticism see e.g. PR 97-102 §160-1, AS 204-5 §252, MC 243-5 §§327-8, 434-8 §§626 -- 8; and note the relevance of recent attempts to find alchemical ideas in Gnostic literature (D.M. Burns, Aries 15, 2015, 81-108). Forever keen as an intellectual to differentiate wherever differentiations are not needed, Robert Segal has claimed that Jung considered alchemy more important than Gnosticism because "he devotes three whole volumes to alchemy but only one essay to Gnosticism, and even this essay deals partly with parallels to alchemy" (The Gnostic Jung, Princeton 1992, 8-9). Firstly, though, he fails to notice the irony of the fact that he himself ends up offering such an enormous list of references for passages where Jung refers throughout his writings to Gnosticism (ibid. 9 n.26); secondly he overlooks the significance of the fact that the one major work, Aion, where Jung devotes so much space to Gnosticism is also the one in which he claims he deposited his "secret knowledge" (M. Ostrowski-Sachs, From conversations with C.G. Jung, Zurich 1971, 68); and third, if Segal had taken the trouble to study 588 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE in depth the Gnostic and alchemical texts he claimed to write about, he would have realized that Jung's real reason for not speaking about Gnosticism at greater length was because what is most important and most sacred should only be referred to indirectly. Segal then makes the further mistake of trying to distinguish the supposedly transformative and holistic worldview implicit in alchemy from a supposedly radical, otherworldly or salvational dualism on the part of the Gnostics (The Gnostic Jung 31-3, cf. SEJT 13/2, Summer 1994, 51-65; this simplistic caricature of the Gnostic outlook is also a crucial flaw in more recent literature such as Sanford Drob's Kabbalistic visions, New Orleans 2010, or in summaries such as Ann Casement's Carl] Gustav Jung, London 2001). But the new mass of Gnostic texts found at Nag Hammadi in 1945, together with a closer examination of other Gnostic literature already known and available for a long time, demonstrates that this view of the Gnostics as world-denying dualists has far more to do with the way orthodox Christians wanted to portray -- and attack -- them than with any grounded reality. See e.g. I. Dunderberg, Beyond Gnosticism (New York 2008); N.D. Lewis, Cosmology and fate in Gnosticism and Graeco -- Roman antiquity (Leiden 2013); and for the relevance of the Nag Hammadi discoveries to Jung's own understanding of Gnosticism cf. L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 4-6 with S.A. Hoeller in V. MacDermot, The fall of Sophia (Great Barrington 2001) 20. That leaves the final question of the extent to which Jung, himself, could at times be an otherworldly dualist. Many people reading a confession like "it's such a powerful force, this whole unspiritual domination by the earth, that I fear it. It has the ability to push the physical part of me into rebellion against the spirit so that before reaching the highest point of my flight I fall back, crippled, to the earth" might swear these are the words of an ancient Gnostic. In fact they were words NOTES TO PAGES 187-188 589 written, as part of a personal letter, by Jung (JBi 72, cf. JZ i 49; compare ST 396 §615). And, to points like this, one has a natural duty to add that the fundamental structure of two opposing spirits which is already introduced right at the start of the Red book owes a very clear debt to the dualistic structures of ancient Gnosticism (Owens 27). 83 On the depth and persistence of Jung's later involvement with Gnosticism see AN, volumes vii-viii; A. Ribi, Analytische Psychologie 13 (1982) 210-11 and The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 130-47. On the other hand, that he had already been alerted to the profound significance of alchemical tradition by 1910 and early 1911 is not only stated without any ambiguity by Jung himself (JZ i 274). It also is clear from the pencilled markings inside his own copy of Richard Reitzenstein's Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen (Leipzig 1910, especially 140-1): he devoured its contents as soon as the book was published so that he could refer to it in an important piece he himself would publish the following year (JPPF 3/1, 1911, 182 n.2), and his markings at the time show he was particularly fascinated by the alchemical visions of Zosimus. Equally revealing is a comment published by Sabina Spielrein during the same year, in which she notes that for the psychological symbolism of cooking and fire "Jung refers me to the vision of Zosimus" as recorded in Berthelot's Les alchimistes grecs (ibid. 353 n.2. Her language when she summarizes what Zosimus saw corresponds, almost exactly, to the wording in Jung's copy of Reitzenstein: for the ongoing relationship between her and Jung see e.g. J. Launer, [J/S 7, 2015, 186-9 with L.S. Owens in Das Rote Buch, ed. 'T. Arzt, Wiirzburg 2015, 234-6). And one year later Jung could hardly contain his continuing enthusiasm about what he had discovered, not only making multiple references in print to the visions of Zosimus 590 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE but even referring back to the involvement of Spielrein (JPPF 4/1, 1912, 184-5, 250 n.1, 352, 405 n.2, 408, 457 n.1). What this all means is that the traditional account, according to which Jung's interest in alchemy was first sparked or awakened by a Chinese alchemical text he would receive from Richard Wilhelm almost twenty years later, needs major modification. To be sure, he made the very conscious and deliberate decision to postpone plunging into the bewildering world of alchemy for as long as he humanly could. But the crucial fact here is that he had already made his first acquaintance with alchemical literature, and especially with the underworld visions of Zosimus, even before beginning his own formal descent into the underworld or starting work on the Red book. So when Andreas Schweizer stands astonished at the amazing similarities between the most terrifying visions in the Red book and the equally horrific visions of Zosimus, but makes sure to add "I do not assume that in 1914 Jung already knew the vision of Zosimos" (// 5/3, 2011, 89), there is no need to be quite so astonished and no need to assume anything. For over a century the evidence has been available that shows Jung not only did know about the visions of Zosimus, but was very actively sharing them with others. And, what's more, clear proof that he had already started teaching the psychological significance of alchemy is also ready to hand. See the note left behind by one of his pupils from a seminar he gave in the summer of 1913, "Alchemy = discovering the secret of rebirth" (notebook titled "Seminar. Dr Jung. Summer 1913", Papers of Fanny Bowditch Katz, Countway Library of Medicine, Boston: "Alchemie = das Geheimnis der Wiedergeburt zu finden"). 84 For personality no. 2 as not only the source of "meaning and historical continuity" but also the "region of inner darkness" see MDR 92/87. Of course one minor implication of this is that NOTES TO PAGES 188-189 591 history and meaning are fundamentally inseparable, which is a position many modern academics will fight to the end (cf. e.g. K. von Stuckrad's chillingly inhuman prohibitions, Numen 49, 2002, 215). On the ancient tradition, already prefigured in Parmenides, of outstripping scholars at their own game see Reality 221-58. For Jung's understanding of alchemical literature outstripping even the knowledge of Julius Ruska, the greatest expert on alchemical tradition at the time, see e.g. APMM 56-8. His original words about the exhaustive and exhausting nature of his own philological method are well worth reading (JP 17: the published version in MDR 196/205 edits out the most meaningful details); by way of contrast, with few exceptions the work of professional philologists usually left him cold (F] 296 §165J). As for his knowledge of ancient languages, with her usual modesty Marie -- Louise von Franz states that later in his life Jung did come to know "Latin and Greek fluently, as well as I do" (PP 38, 1998, 15). But although von Franz's own knowledge of Latin and Greek was for the greater part acceptable (see, however, PB iv/I 211 with 212 n.4, 233 with 234 n.8; iv/II 121, 385-6), there was often something wooden and almost mechanical about it -- whereas Jung's intuitive sensitivity to these languages, which he had already started learning to a high standard as a child (see e.g. J. Sherry, Carl Gustav Jung, New York 2010, 21-2; compare also J. Kirsch, PP 6, 1975, 60 and testimonials such as [JW 7), is the kind that only comes from approaching something with one's whole body and being. Today there are very few people alive who would be able to read lamblichus' On the mysteries in the original Greek as Jung did (see for example the bookmarked note in his personal copy of W. Scott's Hermetica iv, Oxford 1936, 36-7); he did his own translations from the difficult Greek written by Zosimus of Panopolis, just consulting von Franz with gratitude on particular philological 592 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE issues (PA x, 360 n.21); and he refused to use the standard published translations of ancient alchemical texts, dismissing them as unreliable because the translators had no real sense of what they were translating (JP B31, 19 October 1958). For the scholarly literature denouncing Jung's approach to western alchemy as "unhistorical" because, aside from daring to consider alchemical tradition something essentially spiritual, it also presents a challenge to the simplistic modern creed "that alchemy is not a transhistorical myth but a construct which is culturally produced" (U. Szulakowska, The alchemy of light, Leiden 2000, 10) see e.g. W.R. Newman, Revue d'histoire des sciences 49 (1996) 159-88; L.M. Principe and Newman in Secrets of nature, ed. Newman and A. Grafton (Cambridge, MA 2001) 385-431; plus the kind of references cited by W,]J. Hanegraaff, New age religion and western culture (Leiden 1996) 509-13 and Esotericism and the academy (Cambridge 2012) 195-7, 265, 286-95. Aside from their embarrassingly flimsy rhetoric, such academics would of course need a miracle to get rid of all the evidence showing that western alchemy was a great deal more than glorified laboratory work right from the start: cf. P4 78 §99 with n.30, PR 97-8 §160; APMM 390 n.56 with P. Kingsley in Crossing religious frontiers, ed. H. Oldmeadow (Bloomington, IN 2010) 47-8; H. Tilton, The quest for the phoenix (Berlin 2003) 1-34; K.A. Fraser, Dionysius 25 (2007) 40-51; G. -- -F. Calian, Annual of medieval studies at CEU 16 (2010) 166-90; also D. Boccassini, Quaderni di studi indo -- mediterranei 5 (2012) 7-8 and A. Cheak in his Alchemical traditions (Melbourne 2013) 30-2. As, finally, for the repeated claim by some experts (e.g. Hanegraaff, New age religion 503 and Esotericism 288-9) that Jung in his unhistorical fantasies invented a fictional Gnostic origin for his vision of a star at the core of every human: if such scholars were to do their own historical job, rather than being so quick to reprimand others NOTES TO PAGES 189-190 593 for failing to do theirs, they would easily be able to verify that Jung found this very same star imagery in the ancient Mithras liturgy. See e.g. G. Quispel, Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica (Leiden 2008) 618; the multiple markings in Jung's own edition of the text (A. Dieterich, Eine Mithrasliturgie, 2°4 ed., Leipzig 1910, 8-9); JPPF 3/1 (1911) 200-3 = ST 86-90 §§130-5; BB v 167 = RBu 371b with NZ ii 1046; SD 492 §929; MDR 215/227 with n.3; and for the Mithras liturgy in its original Gnostic context note the comments by R. van den Broek, Gnostic religion in antiguity (Cambridge 2013) 136-50. ®> For Jung's despair at the impossibility of being understood when he speaks about the dead, see JP B26 (13 June 1958). "They still live on": J. Hillman and S$. Shamdasani, Lament of the dead (New York 2013) 2; cf. RB 296-8. On the world of the dead as the reverse of this world see e.g. APMM 77 with n.27, 186-7 with n.48. Already by 1918 Jung had become aware that it was the Gnostics who would provide the ultimate "foundations", the "Fundamente'", for his own psychology (letter to J.B. Lang dated 9 March 1918, poorly translated at RB 207b). But after all his efforts and his work with patients and his scientific discoveries had still left him unrooted, suspended in mid-air, he finally realized it was the alchemists who would provide him with the firm footing and stable foundation he needed because they were the solid bridge deck that could lead him straight back to the Gnostics. Finishing that bridge was a task he was only able to complete with the last major book he ever wrote, and without this firm basis in the past his work would have been nothing but a "phantasmagoria" (JP 175-6, 226-8, 233). For the imagery, here, of rootedness and unrootedness see ST xxiv-xxv; for being suspended in mid-air compare PR 102 §162; and note that Jung's explicit link (JP 233) between the completion 594 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE of his historical work with Mysterium coniunctionis and the completion of his atonement for the crime of Faust has been broken, like so much else, by Aniela Jafté in her preparation of the published biography. As for his poignant statement here that without the solid historical foundation provided by Gnosticism and alchemy his psychology would have remained a mere phantasmagoria devoid of any substance (JP 228), not to mention his anxiety about living no more than a hollow phantom-like existence (ibid. 227; MAJDR 181-2/189), this is a very clear instance of how deeply he had been influenced by Goethe's Faust: see D. Luke, Goethe: Faust part two (Oxford 1994) xlii and, for the topic in general, M. Warner, Phantasmagoria (Oxford 2006). Meanwhile this imagery of both Gnosticism and alchemy as the solid grounding, foothold, foundation not only for his own experiences but for his whole psychology is so crucial that almost predictably it has been either misunderstood or ignored. Trying her best to make sense of it, Jaffé not only rationalizes but trivializes the whole idea by irrelevantly inserting the explanation that alchemy could form a strong bridge back to Gnosticism because it was "grounded" in medieval philosophy -- a timely reminder of how little even the people closest to Jung really understood his thoughts and ideas (MDR 193/201). In fact Jung's vision of alchemical, and ultimately Gnostic, wisdom as the only true foundation for his work or his life is biblical through and through. I am grateful to the Kant scholar Paula Manchester for pointing me to the seminal imagery of Christ as the one and only true foundation in 1 Corinthians, which just so happened to be Jung's favourite among all the letters of St Paul; and compare, too, the purely biblical "foundation" imagery that keeps recurring throughout the Red book (RB 230b, 320a, 340a; cf. also 211 n.176 on laying the foundation of one's inner church). For the New Testament imagery of the one and only foundation see J. Pfammatter, NOTES TO PAGE 190 595 Die Kirche als Bau (Rome 1960), and for its deep influence on German literature as well as philosophy cf. D.L. Purdy, On the ruins of Babel (Ithaca, NY 2011), especially 84-6, 92-3. 86 Jung as an elderly man finds himself, despite all the usual chatter and clichés about his non-dualistic worldview, still positing the firmest dualistic distinction between "this" world and the world of "reality" (JP 226) -- just as, almost half a century earlier, he had explained that we humans live in two quite separate worlds (RB 264a; L.S. Owens, PP 54, 2011, 273). How and to what extent he managed to resolve such a dualism by, like the alchemists, finding this world in that and that world in the play of this is a story of its own; but by starting in such a way from a dualistic foundation the tensions will never just vanish. This is the difference between dualism and non-dualism, whether they happen to be ethical or metaphysical; eastern or western. Dualists begin from a position of deep conflict and work towards an inner reconciliation, a hard-earned oneness, whereas monists or non-dualists start from a position of oneness and then have to cheat themselves into making one half of existence disappear. For Jung on our normal, ephemeral existence see e.g. ST'3 §1: "A moment ago, and we were completely absorbed in the hectic, ephemeral life of the present; then, the next moment, something very remote and strange flashes upon us, which directs our gaze to a different order of things. We turn away from the vast confusion of the present to glimpse the higher continuity of history". Of course that conflicts profoundly with the modern, eastern-inspired and most often quite rootless attempts at living in the present moment or "now". This is why it can be very important to note that according to Parmenides one first has to make the journey to hell, into the depths of the underworld, before being able to discover the living reality of 596 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE the "now" (Reality 26-186); and that Empedocles, too, offered a beautiful but very intricate system of practices for learning how to come fully into one's senses (ibid. 318-559). Again, as Jung himself said, we get nowhere when we strip western or eastern teachings from their proper context. On the frequent inability of eastern meditation techniques to give westerners access to their inner nature see also P. Kingsley, Works && conversations 22 (2011) 31-3. 87 "If we seek ...": SZ 829 §1833, and note the immediately preceding sentence where Jung emphasizes that his professional interest in the Gnostic texts "is not only of a theoretical but also of a practical nature". For the stresses and strains surrounding Jung's delivery of this talk see JW 223 = JL ii 138 with G. Quispel, Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica (Leiden 2008) 151-2. "We are not of today ...": J§ 433, cf. 337. "We're ancient, incredibly ancient ...": [DPW 9. "Supra-personal connections ... obviously wrong": PPT 46 §99. For neurosis as a symptom of people's alienation from the world of their ancestors see e.g. MDR 142/143 -- 4 and, on neuroses as primarily a general or collective problem rather than a personal or individual phenomenon, compare also ibid. 196 -- 7/205 -- -6, 221/233- -- 4: Jung's trenchant observation that professional therapists in his time were failing to take these collective factors sufficiently into account is still true now and will remain true, as long as the greater cultural issues are not addressed. On the obliteration of the greatest Gnostics by Christianity cf. JZ i 34 and, for the psychological implications of Gnosticism being not just suppressed but "stamped out completely", PR 97 §160 with SZ 828 §§1829-30. Aristotelianism forcing the western mind to deviate "from its original basis": JZ i 316-17. For the specific denial that, without history, there can be any psychology see MDR 197/205 (compare e.g. PR 102 §162, within the immediate NOTES TO PAGES 190-193 597 context of 97-102 §§160-1; FJ 307 §170J, 25 December 1909). Contemporary literature on Jung is predictably quick to divert such statements into quite different channels of meaning. Note for example Marilyn Nagy's confidently stated belief "that history serves this indispensable purpose, that unless we understand where we came from we can't understand ourselves in the present moment" -- which she promptly interprets as pointing to "the urgency of understanding Jung in his own cultural context", i.e. the cultural context of European intellectualism in the nineteenth and twentieth century (SFJI 14/2, Summer 1995, 26). On the absolute indispensability of knowing Latin and Greek see JP B31 (at Bollingen, 19 October 1958). Of course Jungians can try to claim there is no need for them to learn Latin or Greek because Jung has done all the dirty work for them and they can discover whatever they want about psychology in his published books, or through their trainings. But that's not to understand what Jung was saying, or to take him seriously. 88 Even when the unpublished Protocols of Jung's interviews with Aniela Jaffé are published, it will be only too easy to miss the remarkable but paradoxical consistency in his crucial account of how initially he had depended on his family and no. 1 personality to serve as the solid ground or foundation which would protect him from the infinite terrors of his inner world -- but ultimately found the real ground or foundation for himself, and his work, in the deepest depths of that inner world he had been so scared of (JP 226-8). Jaffé unfortunately severed the first part of this account (MDR 181-2/189) from the rest, and lost the inner connection. The idea of an "everlasting foundation" stems from Proverbs 10:25 but became a standard part of alchemical language together with any number of other expressions such as foundation of the 598 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE apostles and prophets; the foundation of all nature and all that is created; the heavenly foundation stone and cornerstone; the foundations of Zion; the stone of stones or philosophers' stone which is the foundation of this art (MC 14-15 §§10-11, 92 n.7, 296 §404, 345 §485, 391 n.53, 437-8 §627, 442 n.288, 444 n.306, 447 §640). Jung, for his own part, called it the "indestructible foundation" of experience which a person or patient can only ever encounter by being left completely alone "to find out what it is that supports him when he can no longer support himself" (P4 28 §32; cf. RB 323a, MC 533 §758). Compare, already, his wild questioning in the Red book about whether there is any foundation in chaos or whether the real foundation is the chaos itself (RB 298a). For the ancient Orphic speculations about whether or not the abysmal chasm of Tartarus has an ultimate basis or foundation, see 4APMM 126-9. 8? For Jung no longer belonging to himself but to the "generality", see MDR 184/192; JP 183, 258. And note also the equally important passage where he has been explaining that there are a few people around the world who understand "the divine cause of my existence" because, thanks to the divine will, he has "unconsciously conveyed" his message to them. Then he says: "Conforming to the divine will I live for mankind, not only for myself, and whoever understands this message contained in and conveyed by my writing will also live for me" (JW 71). While the parallelism has been well noted between the first half of this comment and the statement in Jung's biography about him no longer living for himself (cf. e.g. L.S. Owens, PP 54, 2011, 266), the second half of the sentence has been strangely neglected -- perhaps because his comments about the "message" and living "for me" are so plainly biblical and so clearly modelled on the message of Christ. A valuable insight NOTES TO PAGES 193-195 599 into what it means to live, and pray, for Jung is offered by the personal comments of Barbara Robb as preserved at JW 74-6. 90 "For your state ... have built up": ETG 286, MDR 264/283. A detailed chronology of Jung's visit to Kolkata is offered by A. Ribi, Analytische Psychologie 13 (1982) 204-5. "The answer to the spiritual problem ... nowhere save in the symbolism of alchemy": M.-L. von Franz, C.G. Jung: his myth in our time (New York 1975) 279; only a few pages earlier von Franz herself had, evidently without grasping its full significance, repeated Jung's own observation that the Grail symbolism reaches back to the Gnostics (ibid. 271-2) just as she often repeated in passing his observation that western alchemy reached back to Gnosticism. But as Lance Owens has very pertinently noted about the subtle marginalization of ancient Gnosticism by later Jungians: "The last disciples to work personally with Jung arrived in a period when his lectures and publications centered on alchemy, and this undoubtedly influenced perceptions about the foundation of his work. Perhaps the most important figure among that final generation was Marie-Louise von Franz, Jung's indispensable collaborator throughout his research into alchemical literature from the late 1930s onwards. After Jung's death, Dr. von Franz naturally became a formative force in the perpetuation of his work ... Her erudition and close association with Jung's alchemical studies also underscored the role of alchemy as an historical focal point for Jungian commentary" (foreword to A. Ribi, The search for roots, Los Angeles 2013, 279-80 n.13; on the less theoretical and more personal side of von Franz's identification with the field of alchemy compare D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 370-2). For von Franz's schoolteacherly dogmatism, which of course has won her many devoted admirers who without it would feel quite lost, see e.g. PB iv/II 196 plus the childishly 600 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE innocent portrayal in T.B. Kirsch, 4 Jungian life (Carmel, CA 2014) 19; on her positive pride in her dogmatic rigidity and "fossilizing" of Jung, M. Anthony, Jung's circle of women (York Beach 1999) 66-8 with Bair 368, 770 n.69; and for the regrettable consequences of her common tendency to express herself in terms of "always", or "nowhere save", cf. A. Samuels, Jung and the post-Jungians (London 1985) 94. Unfortunately the conscious determination of von Franz as well as Edward Edinger to keep Jung's ideas unchanged led on a subtle level to the very opposite result, because to fossilize ideas or laws or teachings brought from another world is already to change them. 1 As Jung beautifully states this: "The reality is that we have always already known everything all along. All these things are always present for us, but the trouble is that we are not present for these things. The possibility of the deepest insight was there for us all the time, but we were always just too far away from it. What we call evolution or progress is going round and round a central point so as to come gradually closer to it. The truth is that we always remain on the same spot, just a little bit further from or closer to the centre. ... Originally we were all born out of a world of wholeness, and during the first years of our lives are still enclosed completely inside it. There we have all knowledge without knowing it. Later we lose it, and call it progress when we remember again" (JB i 345-6, cf. JL i 274-5: 22 July 1939; for the recipient of the letter see JN 185-7 n.3339). Interestingly, and contrary to the usual stereotypes about a woman's intuition, Jung adds that one of the greatest obstacles to understanding or living this perspective is the rigidity of a woman's animus with its "special peculiarity of making false rationalizations about everything" (275). Looking back and into oneself: RB 106, 297b. NOTES TO PAGES 195 -- 197 601 *2 For some concise comments on the dance of our lives and dreams see PA 28 §34, "The way is not straight but appears to go round in circles. More accurate knowledge has proved it to go in spirals: the dream -- motifs always return after certain intervals to definite forms, whose characteristic it is to define a centre ..."; and compare 179-80 §§245- -- 6, including n.124, on the specific connection between spirals and the Grail. On the Gnostic and Hermetic origins of the Grail cf. e.g. PT' 234 -- 42 §§396-409, IJP 107, PA 180 n.125, JP 358. Regarding the Hermetic or Gnostic kratér see Corpus hermeticum 4, Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs, ed. M. Berthelot (Texte grec, Paris 1887-88) 245.4 -- 7 = Zosimo di Panopoli: visioni e risvegli, ed. A. Tonelli (Milan 1988) 120.27-122.2 with R. Reitzenstein, Poimandres (Leipzig 1906) 8-9 (as cited by Jung himself, AS 73 n.21) and P. Kingsley, JWCI 56 (1993) 2-3 = PJB 43-4; DA 328, PA 299 §§ 408-9, 368 §457, PR 91 §150, 101 n.71, 210 §313, 225 §344, 233 §355, CD 224-5, PPT 312 n.18, Aion 191 n.19, AS 73 §§96-7, MC 240 n.633, 503-4 §717, MDR 193/201. Grail as kratér and kratér as Grail: JV i 328, NZ ii 936; CD 225, 295; H. and R. Kahane, Zeitschrift fur deutsches Altertum und deutsche Literatur 89 (1959) 191-213 and The krater and the grail (Urbana 1965); EIT ii 141-55, 192-8; APMM 133-48 with 135 n.9; and for the historians of language who trace the origin of the word "grail" itself all the way back to the ancient Greek word kratér see F. Diez, Etymologisches Worterbuch der romanischen Sprachen (Bonn 1853) 648, W.W. Skeat, Joseph of Arimathie (London 1871) xxxvi-xxxvii, W.A. Nitze, Modern philology 13 (1916) 185-8 and American journal of philology 66 (1945) 279-81. On the ratér in Zurich and Jung, himself, as the kratér see DA 328, 419; M. Mather, The alchemical Mercurius (Hove 2014) 176, 182. As the editor notes (DA 419 with n.9), when Jung talks about someone wanting to "go to the krater at Zurich for analysis -- to the Jungbrunnen" 602 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE or the "fountain of youth", he is punning very obviously on his own name: for the 4ratér as a living fountain flowing with the magic of its wonder-working waters compare ST 431 n.73, AS 73 §97, MC 503-4 §717. And by comparing the Zurich kratér directly with an ancient "mystical society" (DA 328) he is revealing more than a little about how he viewed the group of people who were gathering around him during the 1920s. For kratér, saviour and salvation see, aside from Jung's discussion at DA 128, his further comments in PR 91 §150. On the dratér as containing the pharmakon athanasias, "the medicine of immortality which makes the new man', see DA 127-8 and also 108 ("... in which the new being is made ... ): Jung's fondness for the expression pharmakon athanasias, medicine of immortality, derives from his reading of Richard Reitzenstein's Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen (PA 98 §125 with n.3) although the idea itself goes back all the way to Empedocles (APMM 218-23). For the kratér as primordial symbol of Jungian psychology see MDR 193/201 with W. Giegerich, Harvest 45/1 (1999) 11, "In the account Jung gives of the prehistory of his psychology, it primordially appears as a mixing vessel sent by the higher god"; G. Nicolaus, C.G. Jung and Nikolai Berdyaev (Hove 2011) 129. 3 Already by 1898 Jung had shown his instinctive fascination with the legends of Empedocles' leap into Mount Etna, as well as his curiosity about what the real motive was behind the jump (ZL 70 §179). And already by 1912 he was describing Empedocles at Etna as throwing himself into "the kratér of rebirth", "der 'Krater' der Wiedergeburt" (JPPF 4/1, 1912, 430 and n.1, cf. 463 with n.1: later modified at $S7'405 §626, 439 §682 with n.88). This is a theme he will keep coming back to, and discuss at much greater length, later on in his life (JV'i 487 and 594-7; NZ ii 1215-20). Not only Holderlin but Nietzsche NOTES TO PAGES 197-199 603 too, as Jung correctly guessed (ibid. 1217, 1220), had been very much affected by the legend of Empedocles on Etna -- so much so that, as we now know, it had provided the original model and backdrop for his Zarathustra (D.F. Krell, Postponements, Bloomington, IN 1986, and Lunar voices, Chicago 1995, 3-23; C. Crawford, To Nietzsche: Dionysus, I love you! Ariadne, Albany 1995, 72-5 and in Nietzsche and depth psychology, ed. J. Golomb, W. Santaniello and R. Lehrer, Albany 1999, 293-4 n.66). For the stream of volcanic lava out of which all of Jung's later creativity flowed one should consult his words at /P 149, rather than the doctored version of them published in MDR 190-1/199; for the corresponding crater which, through giving direct access to the underworld, is absolutely central to the dynamics of the Red book as a whole see RB 247-8, 252a, 366b plus [JP 68, 104-5; and note the later, very serious joke that any successful study of Jung's life would have to be a major work of volcanology (letter from Cary Baynes to Jung dated 19 November 1953 and from him to her dated 30 November: CBA). That the ultimate purpose behind throwing oneself into the vessel of rebirth is not only to become immortal but to become a god is stated by Jung both in connection with Empedocles (e.g. JVi 487, ST 405 §626) and elsewhere (J/P 107). 4 For everything falling into place when one has the "historical pattern", see JP 16 (a passage excluded from MDR 196/205); and compare Jung's well-stated comments on the complete futility of contemplating only the surface of history because, that way, the living reality always "eludes the inquiring eye of the historian" (CT 148-9 §315). On the syncretistic nature of Gnosticism see e.g. Aion 173 §267 and, for the frequent use he makes of the term "syncretism", PR 117 §178, MC 410 §591. One typical example of the syncretism running like a thread 604 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE through his own life and writings is the dramatic scene inside the Red book where his soul hands him the crushing mystery of the magic rod or serpent, soon followed by the seemingly more peaceful scene at Philemon's cottage describing how the old man's magic rod is tucked away in a cupboard alongside the wisdom of Hermes Trismegistus as well as the magical books of Moses (RB 307-8, 312a). The significance of these episodes can only be appreciated when one realizes that the magic rod in both cases is not only the famous rod of Moses which turns into a serpent but also the sacred healing wand of Asclepius or Hermes, and that the juxtaposition of mystical texts claiming to be written both by Hermes Trismegistus and by Moses was a constant feature of the ancient syncretistic magic so well known to Jung through the books in his library (cf. e.g. A. Dieterich, Abraxas, Leipzig 1891, 70-1, 136-205). The incorporation of Jewish authorities and teachings, sometimes real but sometimes fictional, into late-Hellenistic magical literature was one aspect of an immensely complex cultural phenomenon (PJB 69 with n.77, APMM 242 with n.29). Richard Reitzenstein wrote a long note about it, which Jung read with his usual attention to detail and made sure to highlight for future reference in his own copy of Reitzenstein's book (Poimandres, Leipzig 1904, 14 n.1). Jung himself refers repeatedly in his writings to the complexities of this "Jewish syncretism" (cf. e.g. CD 447, Aion 58 §105, JL ii 90; and for a classic discussion of the phenomenon see E.R. Goodenough's By light, light, New Haven 1935, also owned by Jung), where nothing is ever as simple as it seems. Religious and mystical traditions rubbed shoulders with each other, interacted in the subtlest of ways. For example Jews out on the fringes of orthodox Judaism appropriated and absorbed Orphic mystical traditions to create "a superficially Judaized version of the God of the Orphic mystery" (Goodenough 278-97; cf. C. NOTES TO PAGE 199 605 Riedweg, Jidisch -- hellenistische Imitation eines orphischen Hieros Logos, Tiibingen 1993), in much the same way that traditions originating with Empedocles would later be absorbed into medieval Jewish Kabbalah (4PMM 378 n.21, cf. 395). The same infinitely intricate interplay of different elements would also shape the earliest Hellenistic forms of alchemical literature -- the complexities are well noted by G.G. Stroumsa, Another seed (Leiden 1984) 141 n.20 and K.A. Fraser, Aries 4 (2004) 126-7 with n.6 -- creating a situation where, as Jung points out, "already in Zosimos three sources can be distinguished: Jewish, Christian, and pagan" (MC 410 §591). And this triple distinction by Jung himself between Jewish, Christian and pagan brings us straight to his famous three visions of the Aieros gamos or sacred marriage that came to him with almost ineffable power when he nearly died in 1944. Sanford Drob has rather shamelessly labelled them "Kabbalistic visions" (J//TP 7/1, 2005, 33-54; Kabbakistic visions, New Orleans 2010) even though only the first, which seems to have been stirred by some Jewish mystical literature he had just been given (S. Shamdasani, Quadrant 38/1, 2008, 22), contains any Kabbalistic symbolism at all; the second is Christian through and through, while the third derives straight from the Homeric account of Zeus' sacred union with Hera (MDR 274/294). Drob tried to justify his label by claiming that the second and third visions are just worthless straw compared to the Kabbalistic gold of the first, but this is the purest nonsense: Jung's threefold vision "has a kabbalistic, a Christian, and an ancient Greek part ... they are all three of equal standing and support each other" (W. Giegerich, //TP 7/1, 2005, 56; note also JL i 355-6, which mentions the Christian Aieros gamos symbolism before the Kabbalistic, and 414-15). One only has to add that even the fact of him experiencing them in this, very particular, triple combination shows what a timeless affinity 606 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE he had with the old Gnostics and alchemists such as Zosimus. Far more appropriately, Lance Owens has proposed referring to them as Jung's "Gnostic visions" (PP 54, 2011, 262). ** Gnosticism as a philosophical tradition going back to Greek philosophy: PT 11-16 §§14-23, ACU 174 §292, PR 117 §179, JW 119 (cf. JK 205), Aion 173 §267 (where the contrast in Jung's original German between Greek philosophy and Greek, as well as other, mythologies has been lost), SZ 730 §1647. In his personal copy of Hans Leisegang's Die Gnosis (Leipzig 1924, 3) Jung has carefully underscored the introductory statement that not only early Christians but even classical philosophers, who knew very well what they were talking about, insisted on deriving the religion of the Gnostics "from ancient philosophy' -- as well as Leisegang's later statement that Porphyry was perfectly correct when he traced the teachings of the Gnostics back to ancient philosophy, meaning back to the mystical philosophy of the Presocratics (ibid. 185). And in his private alchemy notebooks he also put together, with equal care, a list of references for ancient passages stating that the Gnostics "derive from the old philosophers" (AN vii 111). For Jung's letter, dated 22 December 1935, to Erich Neumann see JN 170 ("tief in Europa, im christlichen Mittelalter und in letzter Linie in der griechischen Philosophie verwurzelt"), adequately rendered into English at JZ i 206. But the mistranslation of "in letzter Linie" as "in the last analysis" in the new Philemon Foundation edition of the Jung-Neumann letters is unfortunate (Analytical psychology in exile, ed. M. Liebscher, Princeton 2015, 118): Jung is referring not to some process of analysis but to a historical line or lineage. Sanford Drob chooses to override this formal statement by him about his own lineage because he considers that, in it, Jung has "ignored or marginalized" the crucial influence of Judaism NOTES TO PAGES 199-200 607 both on his own psychology and on alchemy (J//7P 7/1, 2005, 63); Drob seems unaware that, in the process, he has ended up ignoring and marginalizing Jung himself. And his claim that Jung outgrew this affiliation with Greek philosophy after the Second World War or, more crucially, after what Drob mistitles his "Kabbalistic visions" of 1944 is quite empty. Jung was still consistently prioritizing the influence of Greek philosophy on alchemy in his very last works, written after his 1944 visions and published during the 1950s (Aion 173 §267, AS 102 §134, MC 262 §353, cf. JW 119); and the passages which according to Drob (JJ 6/1, 2012, 40, citing MC 24 §19 and 384-5 §551) show that by the 1950s Jung had substituted Jewish Kabbalah for Greek philosophy as the decisive influence on western alchemy show, on the contrary, no more than that Jung continued to view Kabbalah as a parallel development to alchemical tradition and saw the first real impact of Kabbalistic influence on alchemical literature as only occurring late in the sixteenth century. "His explicit confession ...": W. Giegerich, JJTP 7/1 (2005) 57. For the alchemists referring to themselves, very simply, as philosophers see JS 350, PR 98-101 §§160-1; P, Kingsley, JWCI 57 (1994) 9-13 with n.79, APMM 67 with n.49, ENM 338 n.7; and note how clearly Jung aligns himself with these alchemist -- philosophers in stating that, whenever they claimed to understand something "philosophically", they meant they were understanding it "psychologically" (Aion 241 §379). For the "philosophers' vessel" cf. e.g. PA 238 n.20 with Aion 240-1 §§378-9; for the "philosophical fire", Flying saucers (London 1959) 104-5 = CT 384-5 §§726-7; for the true alchemical philosophy as opposed to Aristotelian philosophy, Aion 161 §248. Being saved and guided onto the right path by Parmenides: Bernard of Treviso in Theatrum chemicum i (Oberursel 1602) 795 (cf. PA 258 §363; Aion 143 §220). "Empedocles circles": APMM 376 with n.14; Kingsley 608 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE in Crossing religious frontiers, ed. H. Oldmeadow (Bloomington, IN 2010) 47-8. "6 Perhaps the most significant statement he does offer is his passing comment that, ever since the time of the ancient Greek mystic Heraclitus, any real sense for the synchronistic principle as so gloriously enshrined in the I ching has vanished from western philosophy (R. Wilhelm and C.G. Jung, The secret of the golden flower, London 1931, 144 = SM 57 §85, cf. SD 485 §916). Even more significant than the statement itself, though, is the fact that he never fully develops its historical implications and just leaves it hanging at the edge of his concerns. Jung's attitude to Heraclitus was in fact far more positive than could be guessed from the snapshot evaluation offered by his published biography, which is what most scholars repeat as a matter of course (WDR 76/68; cf. e.g. L. Huskinson, Nietzsche and Jung, Hove 2004, 81-6). Heraclitus was an immensely important source of inspiration for Jung -- he calls him "indeed a very great sage", one of the columns or pillars that support the huge "bridge of the spirit stretching over the morass of world history", "my venerable deceased ancestor' -- but precisely because Heraclitus had been so fierce in his independence, so obscure, and stood so far outside of any tradition (JE 72 §111, J/Bi 121, 154; cf. JW 24-6, NZ ii 1272, JP 162 and J. Olney, The rhizome and the flower, Berkeley 1980, 89 n.2; the significance of the fact that Jung began his major inscription at Bollingen by faithfully carving out a saying from Heraclitus about aién is hard to overstate: IMDR 215/227). For the Aristotelian "deviation" see JL i 316-17, and for Jung's almost instinctive aversion to Aristotle cf. e.g. JS 211, JZ ii 501. He was happy, on the other hand, to boast in public of his familiarity with Plato (ibid. 500-1, FJ 382 §206J, ACU 78-9 §§153 -- 4); but the reality NOTES TO PAGES 200-201 609 is that only the Timaeus, as well as other places where Plato was obviously transmitting older mythical or Pythagorean traditions (on the Timaeus' Pythagorean background see PR 118 §179), are what interested him. Otherwise, Plato had never impressed Jung in the least or spoken to him in any truly meaningful way (JP 162, 303, and cf. 45 on the neurotic teacher he used to have who identified with Plato in just the same way so many intellectuals still do today). As a matter of fact Jung went to great lengths to describe how Plato never learned to step away from the realm of thought into applying his ideas in the physical world (PR 119-27 §§181-92, 164-96 §§243-90). And in spite of comments to the contrary (e.g. Liz Greene, Jung's studies in astrology, London 2018, 90-2) he had very little sympathy for the abstract thinking of orthodox later Platonists such as Plotinus, who to him lacked any genuine signs of integration (A. Ribi, Analytische Psychologie 13, 1982, 218-19; for Jung's broad use of the term "Neoplatonic" see P. Kingsley, /WCI 56, 1993, 19-20 = PJB 68-9). Modern philosophy "never says anything ...": PPT 122 §250 (cf. ibid. 79 §181, JL ii 125, CT 284 §550, 456-75 §§858-900). "T am speaking just as a philosopher ... lovers of wisdom": JS 98, 255-6; cf. PPT 79 §181, 82-3 §§189-90, 122 §250, JZ i 456 and D. Russell, The life and ideas of James Hillman i (New York 2013) 419 (quoting Jung's statement that "my approach is just the contrary from philosophy, at least in the modern sense of the word"). As for the Pythagorean origin of the word "philosophy", in the old sense of "love of wisdom", see 4PMM 157-8, 339 with n.14; SW121. There can be no doubt that, in comparing his own psychology directly to ancient philosophy, Jung had at the back of his mind Gustav Richard Heyer's strategic emphasis on the importance of the role model offered to modern psychologists by the Presocratic philosophers -- not only because these primordial philosophers managed so well 610 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE in their time to grasp and communicate the irrational side of life, to capture "the irrational secrets and powers of the world and of humanity" inside their work, but because they are also pointing the way forward now into the future (Der Organismus der Seele, Munich 1932, 5 -- 6; cf. H.T. Hakl, Eranos, Sheffield 2013, 65). For the enthusiastic review of Heyer's book by Jung see SL 793-4 §1774 and, for his very close friendship with Heyer at the time, Hakl 65-6. On the other hand, the growing academic movement nowadays to start approaching Jung's work from the perspective of classical philosophy has unconsciously stumbled straight into the trap of wanting to present him as a rationalist and an ally of Aristotle (see especially M.H. Barreto, Spring 77, 2007, 79-98). The same goes for recent attempts at understanding him in the light of Pierre Hadot's comfortably superficial, although pleasantly fashionable, work on ancient philosophy as a way of life (P. Bishop in Art, sciences et psychologie, ed. C. Maillard, Strasbourg 2011, 148; R. Madera, Approaching the navel of the darkened soul, Milan 2013, and Spring 92, 2015, 235-54). But at heart Jung was the very opposite of a rationalist; and there is far too little awareness of the extent to which Hadot, for his part, ended up distorting or simply rejecting the earliest of philosophies with which Jung had the deepest affinities so he could create his soporific clichés about philosophy as a rational mode of living (see e.g. SW 111, 171). The situation is also identical in the case of the trend now, among Jungians, to present Jung as a modern Platonist (so e.g. J. Weldon, Platonic Jung, Asheville 2017). And it's the very same story all over again in the case of Marilyn Nagy's entertaining romp through the pages of western intellectual history (Philosophical issues in the psychology of C.G. Jung, Albany 1991), which not only ignores Jung's fundamental distinction between ancient and modern philosophy but also omits any real engagement with the crucial factor that for him separates NOTES TO PAGES 20I-~203 611 those who create their sugar-coated versions of historical continuity from those who truly have something to say. This is the factor he himself called the "dunkle Substanz": the dark substance preserved and treasured by the alchemists because it represents the very essence and source of their work, and which completely eludes the grasp of our theorizing minds (JP 176). On the historical origins of this phrase see, aside from Jung's comments, my contribution to David Bain's chapter in The world of ancient magic, ed. D.R. Jordan, H. Montgomery and E. Thomassen (Bergen 1999) 205-26 = Magic in the biblical world, ed. T. Klutz (London 2003) 191-218. 7 For the intellectualism of western philosophy since the time of Pythagoras and for "the materiality and concreteness of our thinking, as moulded by the Greeks", see PR 554 -- 6 §905 with n.42; for Pythagoras' quite different role in alchemy, PA 347-50 §§449 -- -50; and on Pythagoras as marking the formal beginnings of philosophy, APMM 339 with SW 121. "The nature philosophers like Empedocles ... marvellous naiveté": NZ i 678; on the Presocratics' intensely real concern with consciousness see e.g. Reality 77-183 (Parmenides), ENM 387-92 (Empedocles) and, regarding their supposed naivety, ibid. 365, 379. Empedocles as "one of the very early Greek philosophers and a sort of saviour": JV'i 595-6. "No one can claim to be immune to the spirit of his own epoch ... the spirit that runs through the masses": 4S 117-18 §153, and note Jung's comments on the "tremendous tension" that an awareness of this limitation gives rise to; for Empedocles on the unavoidable necessity of conforming to normal conventions see fr. 9.5 Diels (reading Aé sphi themis kaleousi, noméi d' epiphémi kai autos) = fr. 14.5-6 Gemelli Marciano with ENM 382-4 and Reality 422-5. But Jung also finds himself subtly challenging, in fact even reversing, conventional concepts of cultural progress or 612 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE evolution while discussing western alchemy and Gnosticism (e.g. Aion 190 §297, JL ii 283); or he simply levels the playing field by dismissing any seeming progress at all as only apparent (JS 350). It can be interesting to note how bluntly forceful he was in stating that his own deepest experiences were the experiences of the alchemists, and the other way around (JP 227, ETG 209; the bluntness is arbitrarily softened and qualified at MDR 196/205) -- and that the solid ground discovered by the alchemists directly corresponded to his own experiences of 1913-1917 (JP 227, again subtly diluted at E7G 213 and MDR 200/209). For the enormity of the task that Jung realized he was faced with in having to solve the riddles of western alchemical tradition, and for his sense of this gruelling labour as a curse or damnation, see especially JP 16-17; MDR 196/205, JS 351, A. Ribi, Analytische Psychologie 13 (1982) 202. 8 The paths leading from Gnostic and Hermetic tradition in Egypt back to Parmenides, Empedocles and Pythagoreans in both Sicily and Italy: APMM, PJB 18-40; ENM 339-56, 382, 386 with 387 n.129, 398 with n.159, 400 n.163, 404; Reality 153-5, 198, 324, 383, 416-17, 443; P. Kingsley in Crossing religious frontiers, ed. H. Oldmeadow (Bloomington, IN 2010) 43-9, On the continuities between Presocratic philosophy and Gnosticism compare also H. Leisegang, Die Gnosis (Leipzig 1924); O. Klima, Manis Zeit und Leben (Prague 1962) 295 n.37, 324 (Empedocles and Pythagoras); U. Bianchi, Numen 12 (1965) 161-78 and Le origini dello Gnosticismo, ed. Bianchi (Leiden 1967) xxviii, 10~11, 17, 20-3, 27, 320-39, 662, 731, 742 n.; J. Mansfeld in Studies in Gnosticism and Hellenistic religions, ed. R. van den Broek and M.J. Vermaseren (Leiden 1981) 261-314 (unreliable on most points of detail although more correct on generalities) and Heresiography in context (Leiden 1992); I should add that Gilles Quispel often used NOTES TO PAGES 203-205 613 to admit to me that he considered the ultimate influences of Presocratic philosophy and Orphic theology on Gnosticism to be a fundamental baseline for exploring Jewish or other strands of influence. The well-oiled modern industry of treating Gnostic tradition as a debased kind of Platonism (cf. e.g. Gnosticism and later Platonism, ed. J.D. Turner and R. Majercik, Atlanta 2000; Gnosticism, Platonism and the late ancient world, ed. K. Corrigan and T. Rasimus, Leiden 2013) completely fails to acknowledge the fact that Gnostics were far closer to understanding the spirit, and actual details, of Presocratic philosophy than any Platonists with their fantasies about an "ancient Hellenic tradition" could ever be: see for example APMM 38-40, 55-68, 302, 355-6, ENM 342-4 with n.12, 384-7, 398. For the major links between Presocratic and alchemical tradition see M. Plessner, Vorsokratische Philosophie und griechische Alchemie (Wiesbaden 1975); P. Lory, Jabir ibn Hayyan, LElaboration de l'élixir supréme (Damascus 1988) 14-15; Kingsley, JWCTI 57 (1994) 1-13; C. Viano in Alchimie: art, histoire et mythes, ed. D. Kahn and 8. Matton (Paris 1995) 95-150; APMM. Akhmim in southern Egypt, called Panopolis by the Greeks, was a particularly significant centre for the transmission of Empedoclean and Pythagorean teachings into western as well as Arab alchemy: JWCI 57 (1994) 9-13; APMM 10, 58-68, 119 n.26, 365 n.18, 388-91; ENM 338 n.7, Kingsley in Crossing religious frontiers 47-8. Hebrew and Greek prophetic traditions: C. Grottanelli in La soteriologia dei culti orientali nell''Impero romano, ed. U. Bianchi and M.J. Vermaseren (Leiden 1982) 649-70; W. Burkert in Apocalypticism in the Mediterranean world and the Near East, ed. D. Hellholm (Ttibingen 1983) 235-50 and in Apollo, ed. J. Solomon (Tucson 1994) 58. For the origins of the Gnostic and Hermetic ratér in the volcanic craters of Sicily and southern Italy see APMM, especially 82-5, 133-48, 159-60, 243-4, 614 TWO : BACK TO THE SOURCE 262-3, 282-3. The legends of Empedocles' leap on Etna as coded accounts of his ritual descent into the world of the dead: ibid. 135, 233-56, 272-7, 289-90, 301; J. Bollansée in Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker I\VA/3 (Leiden 1999) 455- 8. Volcanoes as traditional points of access to the underworld: APMM 71-8 with n.10, 82, 84 with n.14, 233-40, 280-3. For Etna as ancient centre of ritual activity, for its temples built out of lava, and for the family of "dream -- prophets" see ibid. 278-83. For the connection between Empedocles on Etna and Elijah see Grottanelli 651-62; I.P. Culianu, Psychanodia i (Leiden 1983) 35; APMM 236 n.14 with 293-4 plus Kingsley, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 5 (1995) 186~7 on the passage of traditions between the Middle East and Sicily. Jung in the huge crater of the underworld beside "the house of the prophet" Elijah: RB 252a, cf. 247-8 and 366b with [JP 68-9, 104-5; it will be noted that for Jung the function of both the Gnostic kratér and the later Grail is to give direct access to death, the underworld and the unconscious (KY 20, 4S 73 §96, CT 355 §674, cf. also PT 242 §410). For the utter futility of the traditional, schizophrenic approach to Empedocles as rational philosopher on the one hand versus religious saviour or prophet on the other see 4PMM;; for his philosophy as itself a work of salvation, ENM 342-4, Reality 322-4. *? Jung as psychologist emphasizes the very real risk of insanity for anyone making the ritual descent into a volcano (JV i 594-5). Horace too, in a classic passage well known to him, had already linked the myth of Empedocles' leap into Etna with the theme of insanity: see The art of poetry 463-72; ZL 70 §179, NZ ii 1217, ST 405 §626; and, on Jung's liking for Horace, JP 162 with J.E. Gedo, Annual of psychoanalysis 7 (1979) 66. For his powerful description of what happens to whoever descends the whole way into the crater of a volcano -- NOTES TO PAGES 205-208 615 being completely melted down and recast into a fusion first with one's own primordial beginning and then with the primordial beginning of the entire world -- see Red book, folio v verso (weakly translated at RB 247a). Jung adds straight away that this experience of primordial oneness is only given to the depths of oneself, because our surface consciousness is too rigid and solidly formed to be able to understand it or participate. 100 "My life is a story ...": MDR 17/3; previously worded as a statement that Jung's life was the story of an "act" of self- realization on the part of the unconscious (MDRC). "Touch the black bottom ...": RB 78; "Landstrassen" are not country roads (ibid. 291b) but highways on -- supposedly solid -- land (cf. SM 83 §131 for those who "cannot endure the broad highway", the "breiten Heerstrassen"). For Jung's imagery of drilling and boring see especially I7/P 51; NZ i 369; L.S. Owens, The Gnostic 3 (2010) 28-9; P. Bishop, Carl Jung (London 2014) 166. NOTES TO PART THREE ' This is of course a constant theme in Jung's life and work. See e.g. M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 84 -- 5 = JL ii 593-4; G. Adler, PP 16 (1985) 23. The howls of angry protest against it on the part of so-called "Traditionalist" thinkers -- "As if an archetype ... could in some way cast a spell on and vampirize the soul!" (T. Burckhardt, Mirror of the intellect, Cambridge 1987, 59) -- are a fair indication of how little they understand not only about Jung, but about themselves. ? Letter to Emma Jung dated 18 September 1909 (MDR 338/368; cf. ETG 368). For some context to Jung's first American visit see R. Skues in After Freud left, ed. J. Burnham (Chicago 2012) 49-84; S. Shamdasani, ibid. 46-7 and in Jung contra Freud (Princeton 2012) vii, xiii. > These, along with many similar, statements about the empire whose capital should go by the name of "Platonopolis" can be found in The secret destiny of America (Los Angeles 1944) by Manly Palmer Hall. Heroically he manages to forget that according to Plato's own fictional account, which is the one and only independent account of the place anyone happens to have, Atlantis was the ultimate embodiment of selfishness and NOTES TO PAGES 216-220 617 materialism; of brutal expansionism and ruthless imperialism (Timaeus 24d -- -25d, Critias 120d -- 121c; SW 128). For the direct influence of Manly Palmer Hall's writings on another Hollywood celebrity, Ronald Reagan, see M. Horowitz in Steven Levingston's "Political bookworm", The Washington post, 30 April 2010; R. Perlstein, The invisible bridge (New York 2014) 350. And on the "plethora of symbols", all of them "drawn from Greco-Roman and Egyptian civilizations", which since the time of the Founding Fathers have played a much greater role than any Christian imagery or symbolism in shaping American notions about exceptionalism and manifest destiny cf. e.g. P. Mendis, Commercial providence (Lanham 2010) 13. On Plato's disastrous failure, due to a combination of impracticality and bad judgement, to imitate the Pythagorean model for creating a kingdom ruled by philosophers see SW 156-7 and note also Jung's own comments: PR 122 §184. For the Platonopolis which, over five hundred years later, Plotinus unsuccessfully tried creating in southern Italy see Porphyry's Life of Plotinus 12; L. Jerphagnon in Néoplatonisme: Mélanges offerts a Jean Trouillard (Fontenay-aux-Roses 1981) 215-29; M. Edwards, Neoplatonic saints (Liverpool 2000) xxv, 23; DJ. O'Meara, Platonopolis (Oxford 2003); and for later attempts cf. e.g. J.H. Billington, Fire in the minds of men (2TM ed., New Brunswick 1999) 80, 255 with A. Versluis, American gurus (New York 2014) 33-4. "Perhaps the most telling example is Meher Baba, who during the years of his unbroken silence pointed to America's "infinite possibilities"; demonstrated through gestures that America was completely immersed and lost in materialism but explained that a great spiritual master would be able to guide all its misdirected energy "into the right channel", promised that he himself was the spiritual master who, the moment 618 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY he broke his silence and started speaking again, would bring about this instantaneous "spiritual rebirth" by restoring to America its destined role "to lead the world spiritually". He died without speaking. Cf. e.g. J. Ross, Avatar Meher Baba and the Trail of tears (Jerome, AZ 2011) vi and 69-71 together with the numerous references to America in Lord Meher, ed. Bhau Kalchuri, D. Fenster and L. Reiter (Asheville 1986-2001); J. Adriel, Avatar (Santa Barbara 1947) 26; plus the letter by Bhau Kalchuri dated 5 January 2012 and published in Glow international (Spring 2012) 3. > New York Times Sunday magazine, 29 September 1912, 2; cf. JS 11-24. The danger of Americans being turned into machines had already been eloquently portrayed by Henry Thoreau (Aesthetic papers, ed. E.P. Peabody, Boston 1849, 191-8 = H.D. Thoreau, 4 Yankee in Canada, Boston 1866, 126-34), and Jung's words would soon find plenty of echoes in the 1920s and 1930s. Note especially the 1923 version of D.H. Lawrence's Studies in classic American literature (Cambridge 2003, 28.27 -- 31.3): "And now I, at least, know why I can't stand Benjamin [Franklin]. He tries to take away my wholeness and my dark forest, my freedom ... All this Americanising and mechanising has been for the purpose of overthrowing the past. And now look at America, tangled in her own barbed wire, and mastered by her own machines. Absolutely got down by her own barbed wire of shalt-nots, and shut up fast in her own 'productive' machines like millions of squirrels running in millions of cages." For the Taos -- based connections between Jung and Lawrence cf. J.W. Boekhoven, Genealogies of shamanism (Groningen 2011) 85-8 together with E. Rolfe's comments, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 176-8. By 1931 there was no longer any question of choice or doubt left in NOTES TO PAGES 220-222 619 Jung's mind: as a result of our inflation, and blind hubris, "the machines which we have invented ... are now our masters" (JV i 502). © For Jung's dismal view of people who come together to help collectively transform the consciousness of the world -- which is of course a thousand times more the rage nowadays in America than it was almost a century ago -- see JV'i 201 ("... she is a bit mad, as people who consider how they can help humanity are all a bit mad. For how can you help humanity? Like a woman who came over from America recently, trying to gather all the great men of Europe together, with the idea that something would then be done for the world ...") together with NZ ii 828-9. Note also his general scepticism about those who overestimate the power of consciousness ("There are people who believe that the few who are conscious can hold the world against annihilation, but I am afraid of the terrific power of general unconsciousness": [JW 93); and for his dismissal of optimism as downright stupid see already ZL 86-7 §§228-32. R. Main (Zhe rupture of time, Hove 2004, 161-2) naively argues against distinguishing between Jung's own attitudes and the general "new-age" mentality, with its fondness for optimistic utopianism or collective celebration, by noting that the high value Jung ascribed to conscious suffering is also echoed in another key influence on new-age thinking: George Ivanovitch Gurdjieff. But the real question is not who might or might not have influenced the new-age movement; it's how much, or how little, what either Jung or Gurdjieff said has been understood. For Jung's own appreciation of how true work is done ("Neither propaganda nor exhibitionist confessions are needed") see his comments in M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 86. 620 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY " Note especially Jung's words in JJ/W 92-3 about the critical task of becoming conscious -- "This is our human work. I am not afraid of communism; I am afraid of unconsciousness and of modern science. I am afraid of America which educates its children away from being individuals into being mass- educated people. These are the Marxists without knowing it ... Lhis is today's calamity -- the collective shadow, the general unconsciousness while those who are conscious are like a handful of salt in all this" (1955) -- together with his cuttingly sharp comments about American life in J§ 48-9 or ("mass man breeds mass catastrophe") JZ i 477. And on Jung's fine sense for the fear permeating even the air in America, see his anecdote at JP 126. On his high regard for Americans' intuitiveness and openness see e.g. JP 351 with JZ ii 520 = JK 250 and D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 365. Jung loved showing off his knowledge of American slang (J/W 25, cf. CT 504-5 §955), although he thanked God that he was able to escape being permanently infected by Americanisms as a young man (JP 165). American cars: J/W 98; Bair 368. Jung openly admits that the gaudiness of American life offered a perfect image, or caricature, of his no. 1 personality (JP 83-4). For Americans' proudly foolish illusions about being able to create a better and brighter future, see e.g. his letter to Wilfrid Lay in Vermont dated 20 April 1946 (CBA; JL i 426). ® See Esther Harding's notebook entry for 13 January 1925: Jung gave a talk at Kristine Mann's New York apartment where he "said many interesting things about the ancestors, how they seem to be in the land ... He said that in America there is a certain lack of reverence, a certain ruthlessness. The ancestors are not considered here, their values not respected ... Lhe American disregards these completely, is, indeed, utterly unconscious of them" (Quadrant 8/2, Winter 1975, NOTES TO PAGES 222-224 621 10; cf. JS 30). Jung's mention of Americans' ruthlessness is already familiar enough (New York Times Sunday magazine, 29 September 1912, 2 = JS 13-21); but his comments on their "ancestors" are very striking as well as strange, and clearly have to be explained in light of his intense encounter with Mountain Lake at Taos only the week before (for a chronology of Jung's travels see W. McGuire, Spring, 1978, 37-48). On Mountain Lake's horror at the ruthlessness and cruelty of white Americans, and the powerful impact it made on Jung, see the published account in MDR 233-4/247-9. As for the dramatically uncompromising emphasis that Mountain Lake placed on the importance of the ancestors, and that left an indelible impression on Jung's consciousness, see especially PA 131 §171, also MDR 234 -- 8/249-53 plus the impassioned words Jung wrote to Miguel Serrano, just a few months before he died, about Mountain Lake's attitude being the one and only possible antidote to "the narrow-mindedness of American rationalism" (M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse, London 1966, 87-8; cf. JZ ii 596-7). On the living reality for Jung of the ancestors compare e.g. RB 296-8, JP B26 (13 June 1958), MDR 142/143 -- 4; and for the brutality which at the same time causes, and is the result of, our refusal to "receive" or honour the dead see especially RBu 296b = RB 106 (ineffectively translated at RB 297b). " See Jung's letter to Frances Wickes, written exactly four weeks after the New York event on 10 February 1925, which has been published by W. McGuire in Spring (1978) 47: "I can confirm your ideas concerning our New York experiences. Things had to be as they were and you really did most bravely and admirably, what you could and should do under such extraordinary conditions. I felt it like a ceremonial for the Dead. 'Thus the golden thread has not been injured, the 622 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY contrary, it has shown itself in the fact, that the performance of a very dangerous rite has been possible without bad effects. ..." This mention of "a ceremonial for the Dead" quite obviously has to be juxtaposed with the evidence for Jung's particular interest in the traditional ceremonials for the dead which were still being practised by Mountain Lake's people at the time of his visit (JP 369-70). As for the image here of a "golden thread", this happened to be particularly important to him during the early months of 1925 (M.E. Harding, Quadrant 8/2, Winter 1975, 10 = JS 31). Frances Wickes played a key role in the evening gathering that took place at Kristine Mann's New York apartment: although most of the people invited were Wickes' personal friends (McGuire 40), her relationship with more formal Jungians such as Kristine Mann or Esther Harding was never easy. Jung had originally been anticipating "an analytical colloquium" in the shape of "an informal meeting' -- one that would "give a chance to the people who are truly interested in my psychology" and perhaps allow for some discussion of dreams. But as McGuire comments with more than a hint of confusion, Jung's letter to Wickes from back home in Switzerland indicates that things turned out very differently and that the whole affair ended up being "in some sense extraordinary" (40, 44, 47, cf. Quadrant 16/1, Spring 1983, 41; note also Jung's mention of the wildly unconscious energies he encountered, both at Taos and on his return to New York, in the letter he wrote to Cary de Angulo dated 19 January 1925: CBA). For Frances Wickes' personal role in introducing Jung to Mountain Lake, and the friendship that sprang up between the two men, see Spring (1978) 42-3; for the name "Mountain Lake" itself, D.G. Barton, J//S 8 (2016) 77. 10 For Americans' remote and tenuous connection with their unconscious see e.g. JL i 424, ii 432; Contributions to analytical NOTES TO PAGES 224-225 623 psychology (London 1928) 140 = C749 §103. "Be careful when you tread on the tiger's tail that is the American unconscious': JL i 290; compare, for example, his letter to Cary Baynes dated 28 June 1948 (CBA). One can still observe how American intellectuals who were able to visit Jung in Switzerland, far from showing any interest or curiosity when he touched on America's more problematic side, instinctively started feeling they had to turn the tables and criticize him straight away. See especially Joseph Campbell's wife, Jean, in S. and R. Larsen, A fire in the mind (New York 1991) 363; the most meaningful comment Joseph himself managed to make about the whole meeting at Bollingen was "That was fun" (An open life, ed. J.M. Maher and D. Briggs, Burdett, NY 1988, 122). For Jung on the physician "having to withhold the truth from his patient" and often lie, see e.g. J. Sherry, Carl Gustav Jung: avant-garde conservative (New York 2010) 171; on his special talent for charming American audiences, N. Lewin, Jung on war, politics and Nazi Germany (London 2009) 51. It will be noted how much more professional -- despite their similar initial reactions -- Jung remained in his attitude to America than Sigmund Freud, with his undying antipathy towards anything American (cf. E. Falzeder's documentation in After Freud left, ed. J. Burnham, Chicago 2012, 85-109). In part this was due to purely practical considerations (ibid. 103), but also to Jung's natural flair for viewing the countries he visited with an ethnographer's impartial eye (M.V. Adams, The multicultural imagination, London 1996, 49; B. Burleson, JAP 53, 2008, 209; J. Cambray in Jung and the question of science, ed. R.A. Jones, Hove 2014, 11-16). "! Forum 83 (1930) 198-9 = CT 511-14 §§972-80. Jung sinisterly notes that these heroic characteristics were absorbed by white Americans from the indigenous people they had 624 THREE ! THE SUNSET WAY conquered and massacred (ibid. 199 = 513~14 §§977-9: cf. already Contributions to analytical psychology, London 1928, 138-40 = CT 47-9 §§99-103; M.V. Adams, The multicultural imagination, London 1996, 109-110). For the general readership and tenor of the New York magazine Forum, Jung's "journalistic flair", and the skilful ability he shows in this essay to "soft-pedal" on sensitive issues, see J. Sherry's astute comments, Car] Gustav Jung: avant-garde conservative (New York 2010) 68-9. There is an unfortunate tendency for Jungians, starting from Jung's main editors, to cite this entertaining and flattering 1930 essay as most fully representative of his views on America -- even when commenting on passages where Jung explicitly states that his real insights into American psychology came to him in 1912 (JZ i 532 with n.8). '2 "The quotations are from MDR 173-4/179-81, where Jung tells his famous dream of 18 December 1913 about Siegfried's "heroic idealism" and explains this in terms of German national psychology. See also RB 242b with n.123; JP 98; 5.F. Walker, Jung and the Jungians on myth (London 2002) 43 Jung's ideal figure of the hero corresponds to "the militaristic spirit threatening Europe just before the outbreak of World War I ... Lhe sinister image of Siegfried represented the ruthless Germanic power drive, a peculiarly German form of bullying heroism"). For the collective attitude of "God-Almightiness" which "does not make man divine, it merely fills him with arrogance and" is bound to "lead to catastrophe", see e.g. CT 214-15 §§437-9; and on the disastrous implications of the slogan "Where there is a will there is a way" compare PR 534-5 §869, SZ 241 §555, 705 §1588. For Hitler's eventual identification of himself with the mythological figure of Siegfried see W.E. Grim in New studies in Richard Wagner's NOTES TO PAGES 225-226 625 "The ring of the Nibelung', ed. H.W. Richardson (Lewiston, NY 1991) 155-75; and on Jung's own, profoundly ambivalent, linking of Siegfried with Nazism during the immediate run-up to the Second World War, CT 190 n.16 with A. Samuels, JAP 38 (1993) 465-6. For Jung it became almost routine to compare the national psychology of Germans and Americans. Cf. e.g. CT 45 -- 6 §§94 -- 5, JL i 424, plus passages such as the one where he compares German with American politics before remarkably describing America's decision to go off the gold standard as a downright "crime, highway robbery, just as black as the swastika" (NZ i 376-7). American Jungians very naturally tend nowadays to see nothing wrong in the value of money "being hollowed out", and can be only too happy to dismiss these remarks by Jung as betraying the old-world prejudice of "a good Swiss' conservative (J. Sherry, Car/ Gustav Jung: avant-garde conservative, New York 2010, 161). Otherwise, when not being used to undermine what Jung wanted to convey, the whole tendency to analyze people or countries in terms of national characteristics has become politically very incorrect -- because today we live in a single, global world of common oneness. Often, though, no attention is paid to the uncomfortable fact that this irresistible movement towards spiritual as well as material globalization is ever so subtly western -- centric: one more manifestation of the western world's, and in particular America's, insidiously missionary dynamic. 8 MDR 174/180-1. Cf. RB 241-2 with n.115; [/P 53, 61-2. As Jung once explained the matter (ibid. 53), "If you give up this thinking, this hero ideal, you commit a secret murder"' -- which for any westerner amounts, in a sense, to the murder of that murder already committed thousands of years earlier by Aristotle and Plato. It can be helpful to note that in the Red book Jung identifies heroic idealism very squarely with the spirit 626 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY he refers to as the spirit of this time: a spirit "bejewelled with the most beautiful heroic virtues" whose constant aim is to keep driving people higher and higher to the "brightest solar heights, in everlasting ascent", at least until the spirit of the depths quietly interferes and "wipes out" any trace of the heroic aspiration inside us (RBu 240a with n.101, cf. RB 240a with n.100). And there is nothing even remotely accidental about the fact that -- when addressing the bravely heroic attitude of "young America" right at the end of a piece about contemporary realities -- he does so straight after announcing, as formally and explicitly as possible, that now he is switching over to speak on behalf of "the spirit of the times". See CT 93-4 §§195-6 = "die Seele unserer Weltlichkeit" in Seelenprobleme der Gegenwart (Zurich 1931) 433; and compare this mention of "Weltlichkeit" or superficial worldliness with the way that, elsewhere, he links the very same word to America (JP 83-4). " ER. Kraus, Zeitschrift flir Assyriologie und verwandte Gebiete 43 (1936) 96-7.8-9 = B. Bock, Die babylonisch -- assyrische Morphoskopie (Vienna 2000) 134 -- -5.65 -- 66. See also H.H. Schmid, Wesen und Geschichte der Weisheit (Berlin 1966) 127-9; H.D. Galter in Natur-Bilder, ed. R.P. Sieferle and H. Breuninger (Frankfurt 1999) 53; N. Veldhuis in A// those nations, ed. H.L.J. Vanstiphout et al. (Groningen 1999) 170; and, in general, G. Buccellati, Journal of the American Oriental Society 101 (1981) 37 with Bock 40-2. For a summary of similar sentiments in Greek prophetic tradition, including the oracular requirement to "bow before the divine" (proskunei to theion), see M. McPherran in Does Socrates have a method?, ed. G.A. Scott (University Park, PA 2002) 133 n.51. 'S "Look into the source ...": Jalal al-Din Rimi, Kitab-i fihi ma fihi §38 (ed. B. Furdzanfar, Tehran 1952, 142); of the various NOTES TO PAGES 226-231 627 published English translations the most faithful is still A.J. Arberry's, Discourses of Rimi (London 1961) 151-2. Marie -- Louise von Franz also has some good words on the subject of human skills and divine revelation (Creation myths, Boston 1995, 140-2), although Jung conveys the essence with far more power (NZ ii 969-71). For the western traditions of prophecy see e.g. C. Grottanelli in La soteriologia dei culti oriental nell' Impero romano, ed. U. Bianchi and M.J. Vermaseren (Leiden 1982) 649-70; W. Burkert in Apocalypticism in the Mediterranean world and the Near East, ed. D. Hellholm (Tiibingen 1983) 235-54, The Greek renaissance of the eighth century B.C., ed. R. Hagg (Stockholm 1983) 115-19, The ortentalizing revolution (Cambridge, MA 1992), and Apollo, ed. J. Solomon (Tucson 1994) 49-60, 145-7; APMM 224-7, 236 n.14, 293-4 and P. Kingsley, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 5 (1995) 183-91; M.L. West, The east face of Helicon (Oxford 1997) 46-54; M.A. Flower, The seer in ancient Greece (Berkeley 2008) 24-5, 29-37 with M. Nissinen in Raising up a faithful exegete, ed. K.L. Noll and B. Schramm (Winona Lake 2010) 3-29; L. Gemelli Marciano in La costruzione del discorso filosofico nell'eta dei Presocratici, ed. M.M. Sassi (Pisa 2006) 203-35 and La filosofia antica, ed. L. Perilli and D.P. Taormina (Novara 2012) 3-34; O. Levaniouk in Homeric contexts, ed. F. Montanari, A. Rengakos and C. Tsagalis (Berlin 2012) 385 -- 6. 16 "Condescending to lighten ...": K. Dover, Talanta 7 (1976) 49. For the standard denunciation by western intellectuals of Empedocles in particular as prophet, charlatan and poseur see e.g. K. Friis Johansen, A history of ancient philosophy (London 1998) 64; or Bertrand Russell's far more famous History of western philosophy (London 1946) 72. For Parmenides' and Empedocles' portrayals of humanity see [DPW 221-3, Reality 83-125 and 326-7. With regard to Heraclitus' very 628 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY similar comments about everyone being asleep, it somehow never dawns on most modern scholars that he might just be referring -- in spite of all their brilliant thoughts and impressive rationality -- to them. See e.g. J. Mansfeld, Mnemosyne 20 (1967) 1-29; H. Granger, Classical philology 95 (2000) 260-81 and in Doctrine and doxography, ed. D. Sider and D. Obbink (Berlin 2013) 191; C. Huffman, ibid. 123; E. Hiilsz, ibid. 284-91; D.W. Grahan, ibid. 306-7. "' For Mani's final great shriek, announcing the end of the world, see the passage clearly marked by Jung (both in the margin and by underlining the word "Schrei") inside his copy of Richard Reitzenstein's Das iranische Erlosungsmysterium (Bonn 1921) 17; and note also the marking he left in his edition of the Manichaean Kephalaia i, Lieferung 7/8, ed. A. Bohlig (Stuttgart 1937) 150.8-12, together with ST 44-5 §65 and MC 273 n.65. For Merlin as prophet see e.g. The Didot Perceval, ed. W. Roach (Philadelphia 1941) 278 ("et si profetiserai cou que nostre Sire me commandera") = Merlin and the Grail, trans. N. Bryant (Cambridge 2001) 171; P. Zumthor, Merlin le prophéte (Geneva 1943); H. Adolf, Speculum 21 (1946) 173-85; Emma Jung and M.-L. von Franz, The Grail legend (New York 1970) 348, 359, 367, 382; J. Ziolkowski in Poetry and prophecy, ed. J.L. Kugel (Ithaca, NY 1990) 151-62, 240-4; B.L. McCauley, Quondam et futurus 3/4 (Winter 1993) 41-62; A. Combes in 4 companion to the Lancelot -- Grail cycle, ed. C. Dover (Cambridge 2003) 75-6. Merlin as the real meaning of the Grail: JP 211- 12; von Franz, C.G. Jung: his myth in our time (New York 1975) 275, 279 and PP 38 (1998) 38-9; D.L. Merritt, The cry of Merlin (Carmel, CA 2012) 144, 146. Merlin maddened by people's stupidity and crying from the forest: MDR 216/228, JP 366; Jung and von Franz, Grail legend 359-66; von Franz, C.G. Jung 277-8; cf. Ziolkowski 152-61. For Merlin as bird, and for NOTES TO PAGES 231-236 629 the ties connecting his cry with bird cries as well as with the lamentations of the "righteous", see Adolf 173-83 with A.C.L. Brown, Speculum 20 (1945) 426-32 and McCauley 54-6 n.11; the link between bird -- language and language of prophecy is entirely missed by von Franz (Grail legend 382-3). For Jung himself as Merlin, and for his own life's work as giving voice again to Merlin's incomprehensible cry, see his comments in MDR 216/228 together with his humorous remark as reported by D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 758 n.64 ("Merlin disappears in the woods -- He goes to Bollingen!": cf. JP 211, 223); his direct statement, left out of Memories, that something inside him had always profoundly identified with Merlin (JP 211); von Franz, C.G. Jung 269-87 and PP 38 (1998) 38; Merritt 58, 145-6. Onto the final, blank face of the stone beside his tower at Bollingen he had intended to carve "the cry of Merlin'; but, significantly, this was one of the details in his life he left incomplete (JP 211, MDR 216/228, von Franz 280 with n.29). For his total inability, exactly like Merlin, to be understood see JP 366-7. His shock at living out the legend of Merlin and becoming him: von Franz 279; PP 38 (1998) 38; Merritt 146. Marie-Louise von Franz is among those Jungians who have most strenuously defended Jung against the unjust accusation of being a prophet (cf. e.g. C.G. Jung 41, 121; PP 38, 1998, 15) and yet she finishes her famous book on him with a chapter, called "Le cri de Merlin", in which she describes his gradual merging with the prophet Merlin (C.G. Jung 269-87): the technical name for this is "having one's cake and eating it". 18 Hebrew prophets and howling: see especially Isaiah 13:6, 14:31, 16:7, 23:1-14, Jeremiah 4:8, 20:7-9, 48:20 and 31, Ezekiel 21:12, 30:2, Joel 1:5, 1:11 and 13, Micah 1:8, Zephaniah 1:11, Zechariah 11:2-3. Ancient Greek prophets and howling: Empedocles frs. 118 and 121 Diels = frs. 163 630 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY and 166 Gemelli Marciano (A/ausa te kai kékusa ...). Lallaru, "howler" or "wailer", as a name for Babylonian prophets: S. Parpola, Assyrian prophecies (Helsinki 1997) xlvi, civ n.232; M. Nissinen, Prophecy in its ancient Near Eastern context (Atlanta 2000) 93-5, Prophets and prophecy in the ancient Near East (Atlanta 2003) 180, 186 (cf. 102, 130) and in Raising up a faithful exegete, ed. K.L. Noll and B. Schramm (Winona Lake 2010) 8-12; cf. also MJ. de Jong, Isaiah among the ancient Near Eastern prophets (Leiden 2007) 180 n.21, 289 with n.16; there are even scholars willing to suggest that the standard Hebrew and Arabic word for a prophet, nadi, really comes from nabdé meaning to "howl" or "wail" (Parpola xcvii n.141). Goés, "howler", as the ancient Greek name for a shaman or medicine man: see especially W. Burkert, Reinisches Museum 105 (1962) 36-55. On the very real connections between Central Asian shamans and Greek prophets, often short-sightedly denied by scholars who are quite incapable of accommodating the evidence, see SW together with my earlier comments in Studia Iranica 23 (1994) 187-98. And on the issue of analogies between Hebrew or Babylonian prophecy and shamanism see e.g. P.F. Craffert, The life of a Galilean shaman (Eugene 2008); L.L. Grabbe in Prophecy and the prophets in anctent Israel, ed. J. Day (New York 2010) 117-32; Nissinen in Raising up a faithful exegete 28; also Burkert, Structure and history in Greek mythology and ritual (Berkeley 1979) 183 n.12. On the intimate association between howling of Hebrew prophets and mourning for the dead see e.g. J.L. Mays, Micah (Philadelphia 1976) 50-2, 54, 60. Empedocles' words about crying and howling in fr. 118 Diels = fr. 163 Gemelli Marciano are directly related to the underworld or world of the dead (G, Zuntz, Persephone, Oxford 1971, 199-203; L. Gemelli Marciano, Die Vorsokratiker ii, 2" ed., Berlin 2013, 430-2; cf. also R. Janko, Zeitschrift fir Papyrologie und Epigraphik 150, NOTES TO PAGE 236 631 2004, 6-8, 20 -- 1). The Babylonian /a//aru or "howler", too, wails above all for the dead: see the Chicago Assyrian dictionary ix (Chicago 1973) 47b -- 48a; A.-C. Rendu, Revue de l'histoire des religions 225 (2008) 209-10; S. Bar, Bidlica 91 (2010) 270. And, just as with Empedocles, the howling of the goés relates especially to the underworld or realms of the dead: aside from Burkert's classic comments (RAeinisches Museum 105, 1962, 36-55) see S.I. Johnston's mostly lifeless discussions in Restless dead (Berkeley 1999) 100-23 and The world of ancient magic, ed. D.R. Jordan, H. Montgomery and E. Thomassen (Bergen 1999) 83-102. Nothing could be less coincidental than the fact that Empedocles, himself, was considered a goés (Gorgias in Diogenes Laertius, Lives and views of famous philosophers 8.59; the Suda s.v. apnous, APMM 220-1 with n.9). Jung on Nature's outrage: PR 344 §531; cf. P. Kingsley, Works & conversations 22 (2011) 31-3. " For the dynamic of ancient Hebrew prophets struggling against their mission and trying hard to negotiate, even deny, it cf. e.g. Exodus 3:11, 4:1 and 13, 5:22-3, Jeremiah 20:7-9, Zechariah 13:4 -- 6; A. Laytner, Arguing with God (Lanham 1990); M. Dean -- Otting in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2"4 ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 1389. Self-righteous Christian commentators have done a wonderful job of redefining prophets as cheerful and perfectly obliging servants of their Lord -- even going so far as to make the absurd claim that Jonah was the only prophet who had a problem with being a prophet. See especially R. Payne, The expository times 100 (1989) 131-4, "Jonah is presented as a parody or caricature of a prophet ... He shows a complete lack of understanding of the concerns of God ... inconsistent with a prophet's position ... a prophet who acts in a way completely contrary to his prophetic calling ... a complete reversal of what he should be 632 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY ... Jonah provides a challenge to all who are called to Christian ministry. This is not the way it should be. ..." And Jungian commentators on Jonah tend to do no better: compare for example J. Park's quite typical discomfort with "the prophet's uncomfortable encounter with God" and his condescending judgement that "while God's command is urgent, Jonah's reaction is contrary to normal expectations" (Inspired speech, ed. J. Kaltner and L. Stulman, London 2004, 276-85), as if he could actually know what the normal expectations in such a situation would be. It was with far more humility, and hard experience, that Muhammad supposedly told the people around him: "Let none of you say that I am better than Jonah" (M. Lings, Muhammad, London 1983, 212). In other words it takes a prophet to understand a prophet. 2° For some fine comments on the futility of a prophet's task, and the utter incongruity between the inner vision revealed to a prophet and "the reality of the people's actual condition. The two were often felt to be totally incompatible, even to the extent that the prophet sometimes felt it useless to preach to an audience who were so far away from what their God had intended them to be", see A. Viberg, Tyndale bulletin 47 (1996) 113. For the poignant definition of a prophet as someone who "delivers a message that never arrives", and on the prophetic call as a cry that "howls in a void", cf. J. Wojcik and R.-J. Frontain, Poetic prophecy in western literature (Rutherford, NJ 1984) 9-10 with A. Ostriker, The American poetry review 26/4 (July-August 1997) 29. And for a very rare modern effort not to ignore or silence the prophets' howl but to understand it, see Rami Shapiro's commentary on Isaiah 13:6: "There is no escape from the ambush of your own cruelty and misdeeds. But there is a response: Howl. Howling is a raw expression of your pain, horror, and fear. It is an inarticulate yet definite blast of NOTES TO PAGES 236-238 633 truth. You are reduced to primal emotion, and nothing makes sense. When you howl, you release the energies building up within you. When you howl, you shatter the facade of denial and the delusion that there is rescue waiting. When you howl, you cease all thought and feeling, and reach a level of sheer being that is beneath the foundation of self. When you howl, you exhaust the last remnants of hope ..." (The Hebrew prophets, Woodstock, VT 2004, 132). 21 For some wide-ranging comments on the official suppression of prophecy in the Abrahamic religions see Henry Corbin, Le monde non chrétien 51/52 (1960) 135-51 and 70 (1964) 61-85; for its continuation regardless cf. e.g. N. Cohn's The pursuit of the millennium (2TM ed., New York 1961), M. Goldish, The Sabbatean prophets (Cambridge, MA 2004), M. Baigent, Racing toward Armageddon (New York 2009). The standard narratives about the silencing of prophecy in Judaism are brought together and discussed now by L.S. Cook, On the question of the 'cessation of prophecy' in ancient Judaism (Tubingen 2011). For the urge of early Christian authorities to reject prophecy as an "abomination" (ebdelyktai) see e.g. Eusebius, Church history 5.16.4 and 5.19.2 together with Tertullian, On fasting 1.3; it will be noted that Carl Jung was particularly taken by the controversial revival of Christian prophecy associated with Joachim of Fiore (Aion 82-7 §§137 -- 42 and 149-50 §§232-5; JZ ii 136-8). In Islam, almost everything came to hang on the Quranic designation of Muhammad as "seal of the prophets": for its specifically Manichaean antecedents, and the dogmatic use of it to claim Muhammad was the last of all the prophets, see C. Colpe, Orientalia Suecana 33-5 (1984-86) 71-83 and Das Siegel der Propheten (Berlin 1990); G.G. Stroumsa, Jerusalem studies in Arabic and Islam 7 (1986) 61-74 = Savoir et salut (Paris 1992) 275-88; M. 634 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY Gil, Israel oriental studies 12 (1992) 38-9; J.C. Reeves, Heralds of that good realm (Leiden 1996) 8-11, 22 n.27; C. Robinson in The cult of saints in late antiquity and the Middle Ages, ed. J. Howard-Johnston and P.A. Hayward (Oxford 1999) 256-8; J. van Ess, The flowering of Muslim theology (Cambridge, MA 2006) 23-4; D.S. Powers, Muhammad is not the father of any of your men (Philadelphia 2009) 50-4, 272-3; and U. Rubin's recent, although sadly unbalanced, discussion in Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 164 (2014) 65-96. For the statement attributed to Muhammad's youngest and dearest wife (M. Lings, Muhammad, London 1983, 272) -- "Say that he is the seal of prophets but do not say that there is no prophet after him' -- see Powers 53. It seems not to have been noticed that the same imagery of "sealing", in the ancient sense not of closing or ending anything but of simply validating and endorsing earlier mystical or prophetic teachings, is also used by Numenius of Apamea during the second century AD (fr. 1a des Places = fr. 9a Leemans): for the connection between Apamea, in Syria, and the beginnings of Manichaeism see e.g. C. Elsas, Neuplatonische und gnostische Weltablehnung in der Schule Plotins (Berlin 1975) 34-9; G.P. Luttikhuizen, The revelation of Elchasai (Tiibingen 1985); P. Athanassiadi, La /utte pour | orthodoxie dans le platonisme tardif (Paris 2006) 81-2. 2 For Ginsberg describing how the forms of "Howl", as well as "Kaddish", "developed out of an extreme rhapsodic wail I once heard in a madhouse'" see his comments in On the poetry of Allen Ginsberg, ed. L. Hyde (Ann Arbor 1984) 82. It was Jack Kerouac who, catching the essence of the poem, initially proposed the one-word title (How/ on trial, ed. B. Morgan and N.J. Peters, San Francisco 2006, 33 and n.4); for the complete text and context see How/ and other poems (San Francisco 1956), Howl (New York 1986). That all of western culture is mad is a NOTES TO PAGES 238-239 635 constant theme in "Howl": cf. also J. Raskin, American scream (Berkeley 2004) 119-20 on "the insanity of America" together with the context provided by A. Ostriker in Wiliam Blake and the moderns, ed. R.J. Bertholf and A.S. Levitt (Albany 1982) 114, 127-8. Exuded from Reason: ibid. 121 and The American poetry review 26/4 (July-August 1997) 30; cf. also J.A.W. Heffernan in On the poetry of Allen Ginsberg 258. There is more than a little to be learned from comparing Allen Ginsberg's impressions of New York ("So you walk down the city streets in New York for a few blocks, you get this gargantuan feeling of buildings. You walk all day you'll be at the verge of tears. More detail, more attention to the significance of all that robotic detail that impinges on the mind, and you realize through your own body's fears that you are surrounded by a giant robot machine which is crushing and separating people ...") with Carl Jung's: "suppose an age when the machine gets on top of us. Then it would become a dragon, the equivalent of the old saurians, and really, when you look at New York, it really is on top of man; he knows that he has done all that and yet it pulls him down ... We have ideas about the godlikeness of man and forget about the gods. After a while, when we have invested all our energy in rational forms, they will strangle us. 'They are the dragons now, they became a sort of nightmare. Slowly and secretly we became their slaves and are devoured. New York has grown to overwhelming proportions and it is due to the machine". See A. Ginsberg in The craft of poetry, ed. W. Packard (New York 1974) 73 and DA 541-2; also JS 48-9, JV'i 502. 23 On the healing and magical potencies of Ginsberg's prophetic poetry, and his conscious use of incantatory repetition, see A. Ostriker in William Blake and the moderns, ed. RJ. Bertholf and A.S. Levitt (Albany 1982) 125-7; P. Portugés in Poetic prophecy in western literature, ed. J. Wojcik and R-J. 636 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY Frontain (Rutherford, NJ 1984) 160-71. On the importance for him of breathing, its cycles and rhythm, in the process of composition as well as recitation cf. ibid. 168-9; and for the equal importance of breathing in the composing, as well as reciting, of ancient Greek poetry see especially D. Cysarz, D. von Bonin, H. Lackner, P. Heusser, M. Moser and H. Bettermann, American journal of physiology, heart and circulatory physiology 287 (2004) H579-87, PSIE 58-60 with n.37. 4 "Terrible fucking situation ...": The Paris review 37 (Spring 1966) 40; cf. P. Portugés in Poetic prophecy in western literature, ed. J. Wojcik and R.-J. Frontain (Rutherford, NJ 1984) 161-2, 166, 169-71. For Ginsberg as a Hebrew prophet see especially P. Carroll, Evergreen review 5/19 (July-August 1961) 114-16; Portugés 161-73; A. Ostriker, The American poetry review 26/4 (July-August 1997) 28-31. On his immersion in the world of the Old Testament see The letters of Allen Ginsberg, ed. B. Morgan (Philadelphia 2008) and, for his sense of "Biblical rhetoric", The Paris review 37 (Spring 1966) 17. Echoing the howling, as well as the rhythmic and incantatory language, of the Hebrew prophets: Ostriker 29, Portugés 166-71. Presented in court as a Hebrew prophet: How! of the censor, ed. J.W. Ehrlich (San Carlos, CA 1961) 63-4 = How! on trial, ed. B. Morgan and NJ. Peters (San Francisco 2006) 165-6 (Kenneth Rexroth). On Ginsberg's prophetic visions see Portugés 157-73, and for his 1954 vision of Moloch -- "Moloch whose mind is pure machinery! ... whose name is the Mind!" -- that triggered the process of writing "Howl" see J. Raskin's comments, American scream (Berkeley 2004) 130-2, 138, with K.M. Stephenson in John F. Kennedy, ed. J.D. Williams, R.G. Waite and G.S. Gordon (Grand Forks 2010) 49. For Ginsberg "continuing to prophesy what I really knew despite the drear consciousness of the world" see his own comments in On the NOTES TO PAGES 239-243 637 poetry of Allen Ginsberg, ed. L. Hyde (Ann Arbor 1984) 80. No escaping from God: Ostriker 29. 25 "The prophetic image beyond our present strength ...": see Ginsberg, Gates of wrath (Bolinas 1972) 16 with the fine commentary by P. Portugés in Poetic prophecy in western literature, ed. J. Wojcik and RJ. Frontain (Rutherford, NJ 1984) 164. And note the final movement of Ginsberg's "Kaddish" -- "Caw caw caw crows shriek in the white sun over grave stones in Long Island ... Lord Lord Lord caw caw caw Lord Lord Lord caw caw caw Lord" -- with A. Ostriker's comments in William Blake and the moderns, ed. R.J. Bertholf and A.S. Levitt (Albany 1982) 124. © Micah 1:8. The common translation "like an ostrich" instead of "like an owl" is simply a mistake, as was already pointed out a long time ago (see e.g. G.R. Driver, Palestine exploration quarterly 87, 1955, 12-13; B.K. Waltke, 4 commentary on Micah, Grand Rapids 2007, 66-7). But it seems not to have been noticed that the correctness, here in Micah, of the translation "like an owl" is confirmed by external evidence from ancient Mesopotamia -- where one and the same word, /a//aru, is used both for an owl and for a prophet who wails and howls. See the Chicago Assyrian dictionary ix (Chicago 1973) 48a; A.-C. Rendu, Revue de l'histoire des religions 225 (2008) 209-10. As far as translations go, it can be reassuring to know that in place of "I will go stripped and naked" one widely distributed English version of the Bible reads "T'll walk around barefoot. I won't have anything on but my underwear." 27 Jung comes extremely close to a portrayal of prophets' role as the guardians of creation when he describes the relationship between forests, wild animals and how he was made a prophet 638 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY (Red book folio vi verso, cf. RB 251a). For his articulate commentary on the massively disastrous consequences of becoming alienated from nature, in particular from the animal nature inside us, see JM 249-53; the desire, in spite of this articulateness, to intellectualize and complicate his intimate relationship to nature (e.g. P. Clarkson in Sacral revolutions, ed. G. Heuer, Hove 2010, 97-105) is truly a wonder to behold. "To rely on the birds ...": $.B. Elswit, The Jewish story finder (2TM ed., Jefferson, NC 2012) 64 §96. Compare also H. Schwartz, Leaves from the garden of Eden (New York 2009) 57 (Solomon as master "of the language of the birds, of the secrets of the wind") and, for Solomon learning the language of the birds, see J. Janssens in The figure of Solomon in Jewish, Christian and Islamic tradition, ed. J. Verheyden (Leiden 2013) 250 with A. Asani in 4 communion of subjects, ed. P. Waldau and K. Patton (New York 2006) 170-5. At the extremely ancient Greek oracle of Zeus in Dodona we find the same basic dynamic of birds revealing the language of the winds: the priestesses who interpreted the sound of the winds rustling the leaves of Dodona's great oak tree were called pigeons and traced their lineage back to the first pigeon -- priestess who, after she had landed on the tree, gave instructions for founding the oracle by talking in a human voice (Herodotus, Histories 2.52-7). For Greek traditions about the time when humans, birds and animals all spoke the same language see e.g. Plato, Statesman 272b- -- d, Iamblichus, Pythagorean life 178. As for shamans learning or, rather, remembering the language of the birds see especially M. Eliade in Conferenze tenute all'Istituto italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, ed. G. Tucci, ii (Rome 1955) 57-79. On animals as prophets, and their cries as prophecies, in ancient Egypt compare for instance R. Jasnow and K.-T'. Zauzich, The ancient Egyptian book of Thoth (Wiesbaden 2005) i 260-2 (B02 10/2 -- -11), 268-9 (B02 11/3); E.P. Butler NOTES TO PAGES 243-244 639 in Practicing Gnosis, ed. A.D. DeConick, G. Shaw and J.D. Turner (Leiden 2013) 237. 28 For the passage in Porphyry see his On abstinence from living things 3.1-6, 186.16-195.5 Nauck = ii 152-160 Bouffartigue -- Patillon (... ad/' hina tauta parémen dia to xymphyton hémin pathos tés apistias ...). For the passage in Plato see his Statesman 272b -- d (... homés d' oun tauta men aphémen ...) together with the usual, serenely approving comments by scholars about Plato's "explicit manipulation of traditional symbols" (e.g. M.H. Miller, The philosopher in Plato's 'Statesman', The Hague 1980, 37). On the perverse process of "leaving aside" the mythical in myth by reducing everything to what is "reasonably natural", or naturally reasonable, see also Porphyry's On abstinence from living things 4.2 = Dicaearchus fr. 49 Wehrli = fr. 56A Mirhady (... to de lian mythikon aphentas eis to dia tou logou physikon anagein ...) together with P. Vidal-Naquet, Journal of Hellenic studies 98 (1978) 132 and G.E. Sterling in Reading Philo, ed. T. Seland (Grand Rapids 2014) 132. Nothing could be more telling than the fact that for Plotinus, Porphyry's teacher and the most famous of Platonists after Plato, nature herself had become completely silent -- and would stay silent as long as he kept expecting her to offer the kind of rational explanations for her own existence that he gruesomely tries to put into her mouth (Enneads 3.8.4, a passage which completely turns on its head the profound Gnostic awareness of a sacred silence at the root of all creation). It never quite seemed to occur to him that nature might be speaking all the time through every storm and breeze and bird. For Blake on Plato see A.K. Mellor, Blake's human form divine (Berkeley 1974) 260, 280-4, 335 n.27; P. Ackroyd, Blake (London 1995) 89 with The complete poetry and prose of William Blake, ed. DV. Erdman (2 ed., Berkeley 1982) 670 ("Wisdom shallow: pompous Ignorance!"). 640 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY "" Guénon's essay has been published in the somewhat mistitled Sword of gnosis, ed. J. Needleman (London 1986) 299-303 and retranslated in his Fundamental symbols (Cambridge 1995) 39-42 = 'The underlying religion, ed. M. Lings and C. Minnaar (Bloomington, IN 2007) 172-5. For the angel -- bird in Sufi tradition see especially Razbehan al-Baqli's Kashf al-asrar (Le dévoilement des secrets et les apparitions des lumiéres, trans. P. Ballanfat, Paris 1996, 175, 195, 260 = The unveiling of secrets, trans. C.W. Ernst, Chapel Hill 1997, 41, 59, 112). But Guénon neglects to mention that there used to be intense dispute among Islamic mystics or Sufis about how to understand the sacred language of the birds and its relation to physical birdsong: see e.g. Rimi's Mathnawi 1.3355 -- 9, 6.4010-16. Some Sufi scholars are even more extreme, and anthropocentric, in their "symbolic" interpretation than Guénon -- formally defining the language of the birds as "the speech of sanctified human spirits" (W.C. Chittick, The Sufi path of love, Albany 1983, 16). Psychologically there is something quite remarkable about the perfect ease with which a person nowadays can snatch the language of birds away from mere physical birds and hand it to the angels, even to sanctified human beings. *9"Kubra begins with these striking words ...": see S. Ruspoli, Le traité de l'Esprit saint de Ruzbehan de Shiraz (Paris 2001) 72 -- 4 with n.9. My thanks to Stéphane Ruspoli for permitting me to translate his words here, with very minor modifications, from the French; the embedded quotations from Kubra are from the Fawaitth al-jamal wa fawa'th al jalal = Les éclosions de la beauté et les parfums de la majesté, trans. P. Ballanfat (Nimes 2001) 131, 201. The extra Kubra passage that I have added ("I heard these cries ...") is based on Fawdatih al-jamal wa fawda'th al-jalal §150 (Ballanfat 201). For God "who has taught us the language of the birds" see Qur'4n 27:16 ("Oh people, we have NOTES TO PAGES 245-249 641 been taught the language of the birds"), spoken by the prophet Solomon; and for the even more explicit claim, famously made by Razbehan, that he too was a prophet note C.W. Ernst's very sober comments, Ruzbthan Bagli: mysticism and the rhetoric of sainthood in Persian Sufism (Richmond 1996) 24-6, plus Henry Corbin's contextual observations in EJ 26 (1957) 113-37. "Those are the times ...": Fawdatih al-jamal wa fawéa'th al-jalal $150 = Les éclosions de la beauté et les parfums de la majesté 201. 31 For Hebrew prophets as mad see Hosea 9:7; 2 Kings 9:11; Jeremiah 29:26; T. Jemielity, Satire and the Hebrew prophets (Louisville 1992) 138. And for the same kind of disparaging treatment in Mesopotamia compare M. Nissinen in Raising up a faithful exegete, ed. K.L. Noll and B. Schramm (Winona Lake 2010) 14 with n.55. Of course this whole situation was immensely facilitated by the fact that common Akkadian and Greek as well as Hebrew words for "prophet" were, even on an etymological level, directly connected with madness in the technical sense of ecstasy or extraordinary states of consciousness (M.J. de Jong, Isaiah among the ancient Near Eastern prophets, Leiden 2007, 340-1; M.A. Flower, The seer in ancient Greece, Berkeley 2008, 23; Nissinen 7 -- 8, 27; J. Stokl, Prophecy in the ancient Near East, Leiden 2012, 52-3). William Blake is a particularly interesting case of someone who, in addition to being very familiar with the routine dismissal of ancient prophets as just mad, was also dismissed as being not a prophet but mad himself (A. Ostriker in William Blake and the moderns, ed. R.J. Bertholf and A.S. Levitt, Albany 1982, 114; P. Portugés in On the poetry of Allen Ginsberg, ed. L. Hyde, Ann Arbor 1984, 131-2). Carl Jung, for his part, knew all about Christian prophetic figures being denounced as insane (4ion 83 n.55). Among the Greeks, even Aristotle's denunciation of Parmenides and his teaching for leading to 642 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY madness has a special significance (On generation and corruption 325a13-23; Reality 212, 479). For the natural grouping of Empedocles among the mad see Horace, Art of poetry 463-72; Theology of Aristotle 1.31 with APMM 380 and Reality 442-3, C. Crawford, To Nietzsche: Dionysus, I love you! Ariadne (Albany 1995) 72, 75; A. Thiher, Revels in madness (Ann Arbor 1999) 155; J.C. Hampsey, Paranoia and contentment (Charlottesville 2004) 50-2. The fact that he dared to speak with the voice of both a scientist and a prophet has also doomed Empedocles to be condemned in the West as a schizophrenic -- although, strangely enough, the harder scholars try to rescue him from this "split personality" the less they succeed. See e.g. C.H. Kahn in Essays in ancient Greek philosophy, ed. J.P. Anton and G.L. Kustas (Albany 1971) 3-4, 19; F. Jiirss, Geschichte des wissenschaftlichen Denkens im Altertum (Berlin 1982) 199; V. Vitsaxis, Thought and faith (Boston 2009) ii 59-60; S.R.L. Clark in The Oxford handbook of natural theology, ed. R. Re Manning (Oxford 2013) 13. For Empedocles' own words about "trusting in mad Strife", as well as his direct insights into the workings of madness, see Reality 430-41; and for some general comments on the question of prophetic madness in ancient Greece, H. Lovatt, The epic gaze (Cambridge 2013) 122-49. * For 19"-century and 20"-century diagnoses of prophecy see e.g. A. Klostermann, Theologische Studien und Kritiken 50 (1877) 391-439 (catalepsy); J. Moses, Pathological aspects of religions (Worcester, MA 1906), esp. 125; J.H. Kaplan, Psychology of prophecy (Philadelphia 1908: "... these abnormal, pathological phenomena of the soul-life ..."); E.C. Broome, Journal of biblical literature 65 (1946) 277-92 ("paranoid schizophrenia ... a true psychotic"); K. Jaspers, Aneignung und Polemik (Munich 1968) 13-21; DJ. Halperin, Seeking Ezekiel (University Park, PA 1993); A. Falk, A psychoanalytic history of the Jews (Cranbury, NOTES TO PAGES 249-250 643 NJ 1996) 184-7; and note Michel Foucault's amusing but appropriate comment on "the classificatory mania of the psychiatrists" (History of madness, Abingdon 2006, 393). For prophecy as post-traumatic stress disorder see especially D.M. Daschke, American imago 56 (1999) 105-32; D.L. Smith -- Christopher, 4 biblical theology of exile (Minneapolis 2002) 75-104; W. Morrow in Psychology and the Bible, ed. J.H. Ellens and W.G. Rollins (Westport, CT 2004) i 167-83; D.G. Garber, ibid. ii 220; R. Poser, Das Ezechielbuch als Trauma -- Literatur (Leiden 2012); and note the resoundingly dogmatic reductionism of the new diagnostic as endorsed by C.J. Sharp, Old Testament prophets for today (Louisville 2009) 1, 80, 108 n.1 ("The prophets think they see God -- but psychiatrists would tell us that Ezekiel's mystical chariot vision was a hallucination related to psychosis or post-traumatic stress disorder'). Prophets howling is singled out as an obviously pathological phenomenon by Klostermann 430; Halperin 8; E.F. Edinger, Ego and self (Toronto 2000) 56, 58, 64; Poser 419-20. Of course there is no consideration whatsoever of the logical probability that the people who really have been traumatized are not the ones who howl, but those who are too scared to howl. 33 See J.A. Talamo, A Jungian depth perspective on OCD (Ann Arbor 2009) 78-81, 107, noting the extent to which his diagnosis has been inspired by Edward Edinger. Rivkah Scharf Kluger, on the other hand, was a somewhat exceptional Jungian who freely admitted that prophets might be able to offer crucial healing to a whole people by helping to counteract and defuse, rather than heighten, collective inflation -- provided they could manage to bring their prophetic gift under conscious control (Psyche in scripture, 'Toronto 1995; her idea of a progressive evolution in consciousness on the part of ancient Hebrew prophets is, both psychologically and historically, altogether 644 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY questionable). I would be glad to add Marie-Louise von Franz's brief but positive discussion of prophecy in her Archetypal dimensions of the psyche (Boston 1997, 12), except that she has done little more than copy out Sharf Kluger's conclusions virtually word for word. For Sharf Kluger see R. Bernardini, G.P. Quaglino and A. Romano, JAP 58 (2013) 191-3. *4 For James Kirsch's diagnoses of Jewish prophets and prophecy in the post-biblical period of exile see especially his The reluctant prophet (Los Angeles 1973). His persistently patronizing analysis of Rabbi Wechsler as an altogether inadequate and ineffective figure is no less remarkable than his compensating idealization of the old Hebrew prophets as efficient, hard-working contributors to their communities (e.g. 171-7; on Kirsch's extreme idealizing of pre-exilic Jewish history compare A. Lammers in Turbulent times, creative minds, ed. E. Shalit and M. Stein, Asheville 2016, 78-9). To consider the ancient prophets effective and successful at getting their message across is the height of naivety (A. Viberg, Tyndale bulletin 47, 1996, 107-14; A. Ostriker, The American poetry review 26/4, July-August 1997, 29) while to judge Rabbi Wechsler a failed prophet, when people far closer to him revered him as a genuine prophet and saint who had saved their lives (Reluctant prophet 17, 85), is just a little inappropriate. Regarding Kirsch's notions about the essentially messianic role of both Jung and Jungian psychology see ibid. 186 and 193 -- for his revealing language in presenting Jung's work as "a turning point in the history of the human spirit" compare e.g. R. Stronstad, The prophethoood of all believers (Sheffield 1999) 40 -- together with his equally revealing assertion that only through Jung is it possible to rediscover what the Jewish people have lost "since the time of the prophets" (JK 53). On the problems of his "religious" inflation, as well as Jung's repeated NOTES TO PAGES 250-253 645 attempts to confront him with it, see the various materials gathered in JK (e.g. xi-xvi, 164, 260); I am also sincerely grateful to Ann Lammers for showing me the text of two unpublished lectures she gave on the subject at St Niklausen in September 2012 and at Berlin in May 2014. As for Kirsch's own inner prophetic calling, ever since he turned 13, to become "like Abraham and Moses" see his comments in 4 modern Jew in search of a soul, ed. J.M. Spiegelman and A. Jacobson (Phoenix 1986) 149, 154; for his view of Jung himself as a prophet "who will lead us back to the Living One" and play a crucial role in "the rebirth of the Jews", J] 6/1 (2012) 25. In the unpublished text of his lecture on "C.G. Jung's individuation as shown especially in Answer to Job", which he gave a short while before he died, Kirsch also speaks eloquently as well as explicitly and at length about Jung as one of the greatest prophets humanity has ever known (XJ). But it seems not to have dawned on him that this, primarily unconscious, elevation of Jung and Jungian psychology to the status of a prophet and prophetic religion has come at the cost of engendering a new religious fundamentalism. *® The following quotations are taken from Edinger's Ego and self (Toronto 2000) 56-8, which in turn is based on lectures he gave at the Los Angeles Jung Institute in 1986; I am most grateful to Daryl Sharp and Inner City Books for permission to quote the passage at length. Edward Edinger had begun his Jungian analysis with Esther Harding, in New York, during 1951. Often he would comment on what a wonderfully positive experience this analysis had been for him (T.B. Kirsch, The Jungians, London 2000, 71, 101; cf. A. Ulanov, PP 39, 1999, 42). One has to wonder whether, if it hadn't been quite so "positive", he might have been forced just a little deeper inside himself. For the importance of Edinger's 646 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY role as the "pre-eminent interpreter" and representative of Jung at the end of the 20 century see e.g. the obituary of him in the New York Times by Ford Burkhart (2 August 1998); D. Sharp in Edinger's Ego and se/f (Toronto 2000) 151, also G.R. Elder, PP 39 (1999) 12-16, who even ventures to celebrate him as "the finest example of creative introversion born in America since Emerson". This grandiosely narcissistic nonsense, already anticipated by Jung in his description of how a master's inflated disciples "always stick together, not out of love, but for the very understandable purpose of effortlessly confirming their own convictions" (TE 170-1 §263), is par for the course in the lineage of Jungians that Edinger belonged to: compare the quaint lunacy of D. Rothstein's praise for "the philosophy of Marie-Louise von Franz, whose enormous brilliance ... surpassed even the thinking of Emmanuel [sic] Kant" (PP 51, 2008, 355). For the view of Jung as, in effect, the second coming compare Elder 13; Edinger's own The creation of consciousness (Toronto 1984); W. Colman, JAP 42 (1997) 342; 'I.B. Kirsch, The Jungians (London 2000) 101-2, 253; the theological underpinning for Edinger's famous idea that Jungian psychology represents the third dispensation, replacing the first dispensation of the Old Testament and the second of the New, came to him from Esther Harding (KJ 17). Marie -- Louise von Franz not only agreed with Edinger on this but chronologically went one stage further, considering Jung the greatest man since Lao Tzu (The fountain of the love of wisdom, ed. E. Kennedy -- Xypolitas, Wilmette 2006, 317-19; PP 38, 1998, 33). For Jung's own ability to maintain, in the face of everything, an attitude of humility see L. Vaughan- -- Lee, Moshbkel Gosha (Inverness, CA 2005) 71-4; and note his very sane insistence that there are Christians, for example, who can help people perfectly well even without any knowledge of modern psychology at all (JZ 11 226). This quintessential NOTES TO PAGES 253-255 647 quality of humility is always shared by truly great beings, if not by their disciples. Compare Gurdjieff's comment, "Many man on earth more than me" (E. Wolfe, Episodes with Gurdjieff, Millerton 1974, 25). 5° Edinger states that "the etymology of the word comes from two roots: pro, meaning before, in front of, and phdtis, meaning voice or oracle, so it means 'to speak out before all" (Ego and self, Toronto 2000, 47); David Miller offers a similar explanation (EJ 46, 1977, 486 n.98), followed by James Hillman in Lament of the dead (New York 2013) 114 ("forth-tellings"). The crucial fact missed by these extravert interpreters is that, etymologically, prophets are not people who "speak in front of" an assembled audience but are those who are made to "speak on behalf of" the divine reality inside them: the focus of the word itself is internal or spiritual, not external and social. For the force of pro- see especially Sophocles, Ocdipus the king 10 and Oedipus at Colonus 811 (where pro tonde phénein or eré pro ténde means not to "speak in front of these" but to "speak on behalf of these") with R.C. Jebb, Sophocles: the Oedipus tyrannus (Cambridge 1914) 11. And for the original meaning of prophétés see Aeschylus, Eumenides 19 as well as Pindar, Nemean odes 1.60 ("prophétés of Zeus"); Bacchylides, Epinician odes 9.3 ("prophétés of the Muses") with G. Nagy, Pindar's Homer (Baltimore 1990) 163 §34 and Homeric responses (Austin 2003) 35-6; C. Frateantonio in Der neue Pauly x (Stuttgart 2001) 401 s.v. promantis and J.N. Bremmer, ibid. 421 s.v. Prophet; M.A. Flower, The seer in ancient Greece (Berkeley 2008) 86; A. Motte, Kernos 26 (2013) 13, 17. In Mesopotamian prophecies, too, this fundamental idea of a prophet as someone speaking or crying out on behalf of the sacred is very present (W. Burkert, The orientalizing revolution, Cambridge, MA 1992, 80; M. Nissinen, Prophets and prophecy in the ancient Near 648 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY East, Atlanta 2003, 7, 127; cf. also Deuteronomy 18:16-19). As for who ends up hearing, or understanding, the prophetic call: one could say this is ultimately none of the prophet's business. 7 Already at the beginning of the Red d00k Jung notes down the taunts of the mocking inner voices who torment him with the accusation that his ambitions to become a prophet are getting the better of him (RB 233a). This throws an interesting light on Freud's heavily barbed reference -- a few short years later, at a public lecture in 1917 -- to the early work done by "C.G. Jung, at a time when he was merely a psycho-analyst and had not yet aspired to be a prophet" (The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud xvi, London 1963, 269). It was an accusation that, far from being forgotten, would rankle Jung for the rest of his life (DR 150/154). Freud on Jung as a mystic, and mad: JJ/P 25, JSB 72. Since the days of Freud, there has been no end to the list of people wanting to blacken Jung's name by denouncing him as a prophet: see for example E. Fromm, Scientific American 209/3 (September 1963) 283-90; PJ. Stern, C.G. Jung: the haunted prophet (New York 1976); P. Rieff's The triumph of the therapeutic (Chicago 1987); R. Noll, Zhe Jung cult (2TM ed., New York 1997); F. McLynn, Carl Gustav Jung (New York 1996). For Jung's repeated denials that he was a prophet see e.g. CT'91 §190 ("I do not wish to pass myself off as a prophet, but ...', he would write, and after the 'but' would come a stream of prophetic statements!", as David 'Tacey notes about this passage: The darkening spirit, Hove 2013, 40), 514 §980; JZ i 128 and 203, ii 513; SZ 637 §1460; JS 374; M.T. Kelsey, Christo -- psychology (New York 1982) 119 (cf. AS 113 n.3). Note also his pragmatic comments and references at CT 201 §414; MC 105 §125. Two prominent examples of those who would dearly love to stamp out any remaining nonsense about Jung being a prophet are M.-L. NOTES TO PAGES 255-260 649 von Franz, C.G. Jung: his myth in our time (New York 1975) 41, 121 and S. Shamdasani, Cult fictions (London 1998); while von Franz insists with her usual dogmatism that he had "definitively renounced" the role of prophet as a young student (C.G. Jung 41), publication of the Red book shows that her chronology of his life leaves much to be desired. It can also be easy to miss the extent to which Jung's intense and lifelong interest in the subject of prophecy has been more subtly, often unconsciously, suppressed. For example the standard English collection of his letters contains many significant references to the theme -- but although the index to the two volumes very generously offers a listing for "prostitution", not a single entry exists for either "prophecy" or "prophets" (JZ ii 696). 38 There is a genuine significance in the fact that whenever Jung pondered if Freud could be called a prophet he always intended the term as a compliment and not an insult (MWDR 163/169; SM 36 §51 and 46 §69; P. Bishop, The Dionysian self, Berlin 1995, 194-7; cf. D. Tacey, The darkening spirit, Hove 2013, 40-1). Freud, on the other hand, only dared to speak positively about Jung as a prophet in the most private and intimate of settings (FJ 218 §125F, 17 January 1909) -- which must have made his later, public attacks on him for imagining he was a prophet even harder to bear. For Jung's own poignant observation about a "real prophet or saviour" only lasting a few weeks, at the very most, if exposed to our modern world see E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 102-3 = JZ ii 174. * Jung tells Freud that their psychology has to be a religion, and plainly hints at the need for a saviour: see FJ 323-4 §178J (11 February 1910) and compare his passionate announcement, as a young man in his twenties, of the need for "prophets, men sent by God!" (ZZ 46 §138). Freud's 650 THREE ! THE SUNSET WAY anxiously negative reply: FJ 325 §179F (13 February 1910); J.E. Gedo, Annual of psychoanalysis 7 (1979) 66-9. On the need to model psychoanalysis as a modern esoteric institution with its own religious conclave because it "is much too true to be acknowledged ..." see FJ 381-2 §206] (11 August 1910). The official English edition of the Freud -- Jung correspondence totally destroys the sense of this crucial passage by substituting a geopolitical image for a religious one and mistranslating "nur in einem engsten Konklave" as "only in a very tight enclave"; "Verborgenheit" here does not mean "seclusion" but "secrecy" or "concealment"; Jung's solemn warning that he and Freud need to protect the sacred reality of psychology from their own ambitions for public success and recognition (compare his later criticism of himself for chasing after the ambition to become a prophet, RB 233a) is even more horrifically mistranslated as "One should therefore barricade this territory against the ambitions of the public for a long time to come"; and, last but not least, it fails to convey Jung's essential distinction in his original German between the statement that psychoanalysis is "much too true" ("viel zu wahr") to be offered to the public and his very next sentence insisting on the need to saturate the public supply with versions which have deliberately been "falsified" as well as adulterated ("verfalschte"). Ironically, Richard Noll intuited the significance of this passage for an understanding of Jung's aspirations at the time (The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 66). But as he made the mistake of relying on the standard English translation, he had only the poorest idea of what Jung himself really said. "' For Jung's original comments on prophecy in 1916 see his Zwei Schriften uber analytische Psychologie (4" ed., Olten 1989) 302-3 §476 and ("he will not set himself up as a psychoanalytic prophet") 312 §502; TE 286 §476, 295 §502. NOTES TO PAGES 260-262 651 His warnings here about being overpowered by prophetic ambition ("Ehrgeiz") and yielding to the temptation ("Versuchung") to declare oneself a prophet (TE 286 §476, cf. 169 §260) correspond exactly to his own internal struggles as documented, at much the same time, in the Red do0k: compare especially RB 233a (Jung's prophetic ambition) and 367b (the temptation to declare himself a prophet). Shamdasani's theory that "the reference to setting oneself up as a 'psychoanalytic prophet' may be an implicit reference to Freud" (Cult fictions, London 1998, 51 n.11) shows how little, in spite of his claimed insights into the Red book (JSB 99-103), he understands of the real situation here. If there is any implicit reference at all, it will be to Jung himself. *t For the expanded 1928 version of his comments on prophecy see C.G. Jung, Zwei Schriften uber analytische Psychologie (4" ed., Olten 1989) 177-9 §§260 -- 5 (Two essays on analytical psychology, London 1928, 179-82; TE 169-71 §§260-5). His unfailing openness to the possibility of authentic prophets is conveyed by the emphatic use he makes of the words "wirklicher", "echt", "richtige" -- "real", "genuine", "true" -- while his most revealing statement of all is "Jeder richtige Prophet wehrt sich zuniachst mannhaft gegen die unbewufite Zumutung dieser Rolle". Hull's and Shamdasani's mistranslations of "Jeder richtige Prophet" as "every respectable prophet" (TE 170 §262) and "every proper prophet" (Cult fictions, London 1998, 81) radically distort Jung's intention; only the original version offered by Peter and Cary Baynes conveys his meaning accurately ("every real prophet": Two essays on analytical psychology, London 1928, 181). For the quite typical Jungian strategy nowadays of simply equating "prophecy" in Jung with "false prophecy", then waving the whole subject aside as embarrassing and unscientific, see e.g. A. Schweizer, JJ 5/3 (2011) 79-81. Elsewhere, too, Jung 652 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY repeatedly opens the door for true prophecy as well as for real prophets or prophetesses (JZ ii 4; ibid. 174 = E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 102-3; TE 171 §265); and in the Red book he draws the clearest of distinctions between false prophets and true ones (RB 153-4, 316-17). In fact his statement here that, "by way of precaution, I would prefer as a very first step to question each individual case" is itself an obvious echo of one biblical passage for which he had the highest regard: "Do not trust every spirit, but test (dokimazete) the spirits to see if they come from God because there are many false prophets (pseudoprophétai) who have appeared in the world" (1 John 4:1). On the importance of this passage for Jung see PR 416 §659 and 581 §957; the very end of Mysterium coniunctionis (MC 552 §787); CT 444 §839; and compare Shamdasani, Cult fictions 82 n.10 (mis-sourcing the passage as John 4:1), Against the true prophet who "valiantly" struggles against identifying with the role of prophet stands, or lies, the would-be prophet who fails the critical tests of ambition and identification. Especially significant in this regard are Jung's unpublished letter to J.B. Lang dated 17 January 1918, on the "delusion of being a prophet" which will always be a primary danger for those working with the unconscious ("Prophetenwahn', misunderstood at RB 207, is not a prophet's delusion but the delusion of being a prophet in just the same way that "GrofSenwahn'" means the delusion of grandeur); PA 36 §41, on those who become prophets because they "identify themselves with the archetypal contents of their unconscious'; and his splendidly lurid account of "those terrifying invalids who think they have a prophetic mission" (ACU 16 §31). Now, thanks in particular to the Red book, we can at last appreciate why throughout the whole of his adult life Jung dedicated so much energy and intensity to this theme. NOTES TO PAGES 262-265 653 '2 For what Jung has just been saying, only a moment before, by way of introducing the figure of the true prophet -- including the point he makes about the importance of humour -- see TE 169-70 §§260-2. His repeated emphasis on the critical need, in every possible respect, for time and cautious patience could hardly be plainer ("vorsichtshalber ... zunachst einmal ... leichthin ... ohne weiteres ... im Handumdrehen"; TE 170 §262). His own insistence on patiently carrying things around inside himself for a long time before feeling they were ripe enough to be spoken was most unusual: see e.g. JZ ii 452-3 plus his favourite alchemical saying Omnis festinatio ex parte diaboli est, "All haste comes from the devil" (PPT 274 n.8, MDR 223/236). For Jung's use of prophetic language here, even down to the double negative, compare especially Empedocles fr. 15 Diels = fr. 15B Gemelli Marciano (ouk ... ouden ...) together with APMM 366 n.21 and my detailed commentary in Reality 404 -- 6; the same double negative structure occurs, uncoincidentally, in the climax of the prophetic riddle by Merlin which is placed at the beginning and end of this book (peu ... nus ...: Merlin, ed. G. Paris and J. Ulrich, Paris 1886, i 32). For prophetic language as used by Parmenides see ENM 369-81. Wanting to be deceived: Reality 315-559. '3 For Jung's consistent stance in exempting true prophets from psychological analysis see especially JZ i 414-15 (on Hosea); PR 316-17 § 474 (Brother Klaus) and 420 §665 (Ezekiel); also TE 45 §66, SL 205 §466; and cf. RB 295 with JJ/W 94. There were others early in the twentieth century who protested against the widespread, pseudo-scientific practice of psychoanalyzing or "pathologizing" major Biblical figures including the Hebrew prophets: see D.A. Kille's comments in Psychology and the Bible, ed. J.H. Ellens and W.G. Rollins 654 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY (Westport, CT 2004) i 23. But Carl Jung, as a prominent psychologist himself, was unique in his unambiguous stand on the matter. Notice also how intensely he already expressed his feelings on the same general topic as a young man: ZL 43 §134. On any prophet unfortunate enough to have lived "before the time was ready, before analytical psychology was born", as by necessity an unconscious "victim of the process of individuation" see Kirsch's A reluctant prophet (Los Angeles 1973) 186. By way of contrast, for prophets as models of individuation according to Jung himself note e.g. ACU 145-7 §§254-8 with J.M. Spiegelman in Sufism, Islam and Jungian psychology, ed. Spiegelman (Scottsdale 1991) 15; PR 294 §448 with L. Beaubien, Lexpérience mystique selon C.G. Jung (PhD thesis, Université Laval 2009) 63; W.G. Rollins, Soul and psyche (Minneapolis 1999) 56. As conscious guides, models of psychological health: C.G. Jung, Collected papers on analytical psychology (London 1916) 172-3 = FP 320 n.21. Edinger on prophets' failure to adapt: Ego and self (Toronto 2000) 58. Jung on the importance of not adapting: SM 82-3 §§130-1 with Rollins 55. Prophets as the only defence and protection against inflation: SZ 109-10 §§245-7 with E. Shalit and N.S. Furlotti in The dream and its amplification, ed. Shalit and Furlotti (Skiatook 2013) 2; cf. ACU 145-6 §254. For prophets as unique in being able, through their inner vision, to perceive the real needs of their time see JZ i 60 with e.g. CD 142; on the intensity of their struggle to listen to the still small voice within and obey God's will because this sets them so squarely against the ideals of the collective, JZ ii 85-6. It's important to note that Jung was the last person to be unaware of the prophets' very frequent and very human hesitation, or even refusal, to listen to the inner voice (e.g. PR 18 §32). NOTES TO PAGES 265-269 655 44 "We must read the Bible ...": /V i 442. On the fundamental importance of the Bible for Jung, and his psychology, see e.g. W.G. Rollins, Sou/ and psyche (Minneapolis 1999) 46-57 and in Psychology and the Bible, ed. J.H. Ellens and Rollins (Westport, CT 2004) i 75-95. For his immensely impressive biblical learning in full swing, compare /J/W 7. "The common man suffers from a hubris of consciousness that borders on the pathological": PR 84 §141. For the extremes of religious inflation versus "the rationalistic and political psychosis that is the affliction of our day" see Aion 84 §140 ("quasi moderne Menschen die ... eine religidse Inflation besitzen im Unterschied zum heutigen, dessen Psychose in einer rationalistischen und politischen Affliktion besteht"). " The prophet's disciples: TE 170-1 §§263-5. On Edinger as "an ordinary man in most respects except for my ability to see Jung's size" see e.g. D.D. Cordic, PP 39 (1999) 10; E.F. Edinger, The Aion lectures (Toronto 1996) 11 ("Jung's depth and breadth are absolutely awesome. We are all Lilliputians by comparison ... we must begin by accepting our own littleness"); JJTP 1/1 (1999) 51 ("Jung is numinous ... Jung's magnitude is such that he dwarfs all of us"); and, for Edinger's "virtual deification" of Jung, W. Colman, JAP 42 (1997) 342. Compare also the Swiss Jungian, Andreas Schweizer, very commendably contrasting his littleness and poorness to "Jung's gigantic effort" -- while naively affirming the need to hold on to one's "painfully limited reality" as the only available defence against "the danger of inflation" (JJ 5/3, 2011, 26 and 79). "© For the expert assurances that Jung's portrayal of inflated disciples has no bearing at all on orthodox, as opposed to 656 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY "feral", Jungians see especially S. Shamdasani, Cult fictions (London 1998) 81-3; D. Tacey, Jung and the New Age (Hove 2001) 30-4. "Low-grade": Tacey 33; "feral" is another of Tacey's expressions (23, 28). Theosophists: Shamdasani 83. Shamdasani in particular should have been alerted to the absurdity of his own proposal by Alphonse Maeder's informed report, published while Jung was still alive, about Jungian disciple -- psychotherapists competing with devoted Freudians in their fanatical "worship of the Master" (Schweizerische Zeitschrift fur Psychologie 15, 1956, 121: cf. JM 150). For another contemporary perspective, from Wolfgang Hochheimer -- "never seen anything like it' -- on the "cult of the Master" which was very much alive among "Jung's closest followers" see P. Bishop, Seminar 34 (1998) 378-81. One can also compare the criticisms already levelled at both Jungians and Freudians from as early as 1912 for being "devotees of this new cult" who sacrifice any intellectual freedom to their master (J.B. Watson, Journal of the American Medical Association 58, 1912, 916; R. Noll, The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 58), not to mention Victor White's horrible discovery in Switzerland that his friend Carl Jung was surrounded by "only sycophants & flatterers" (JW 273; cf. D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 371). Even insiders from the Jungian community have repeatedly made comments pointing in the same direction (Noll 278). And as one second-generation Jungian, James Kirsch's son, has readily granted in responding to the rabid attacks on both Jung and Jungians by Richard Noll: "there is no question that the early group around Jung formed in cultlike worship ... Any new endeavor that touches individuals so profoundly is bound to have somewhat the characteristics of a cult ... the strong personal transferences that were evoked only accentuated a cultlike behavior ... However, the question is not whether there was a Jung cult in NOTES TO PAGES 269-270 657 the beginning, but whether this was consciously encouraged by Jung, and whether Jung's analytical psychology today is primarily a cult" (T.B. Kirsch, Psychoanalytic review 82, 1995, 794-5). As for Kirsch's first question: we soon will see whether Jung encouraged the cultism of his followers, discouraged it, or simply yielded in the face of the inevitable. And, regrettably, Noll's own experiences with the publication of his book on The Jung cult only confirmed him in his original answer to the second (Aryan Christ 282). But while it can be easy enough now for both Noll and modern-day Jungians to look down from a position of righteous superiority on the cultic inflatedness of those who were close to Jung, the real question is to what extent they themselves are free from that equally insidious inflation: the one Jung referred to as the rationalistic and political psychosis which is the greatest affliction of our age. '7 For the Red book's palpably impatient and threatening, as much as encouraging, message to find your own path and live your own truth see already RB 231 with n.27. For the even darker, and edgier, message to stop imitating Jung or trying to take his secrets for yourself see e.g. 246-7 with n.163. And note also his crucial comments in the section on "The Magician" about Philemon managing to slip away like a serpent out of Jung's own clutching grasp; refusing to surround himself with eager followers ready to devour him by sucking up every word of his, as if it's the elixir of life, before locking the Master in a cage so they can worship him and invent the most fantastic stories about him; resisting the overwhelming temptation to make himself indispensable like all other saviours or prophets; nourishing himself from himself and trying to get others to do the same (315-17). Jung was quite aware of his close followers' servile obsequiousness and learned to tolerate it as gracefully, 658 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY and humorously, as possible: see D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 371 with 771 n.79, also JW 99-100 on the Eranos experience, plus his comment in the Red book about leaving people plenty of space to act out their stupidities rather than letting himself be tempted to interfere (RB 316a, cf. JZ i 518). On the habitual imitation of Jung even among those nearest to him see e.g. Bair 535 with D. Russell, The hfe and ideas of James Hillman i (New York 2013) 373 (naming C.A. Meier, Marie-Louise von Franz, Barbara Hannah). 8 "But in the biography of old Empedocles ... ten thousand lovely followers": NZ ii 1217. On Empedocles' immense popularity and "tremendous following" compare also JV i 596; and note how faithfully the portrayal of Empedocles offered by Jung reflects Empedocles' own description of the ten thousand (myrioi) men and women who followed him around begging for prophecies (mantosuneén kechrémenoi) and desperate to hear his healing word (euékea baxin: fr. 112.7-11 Diels = fr. 157.12-16 Gemelli Marciano; APMM 220 n.7, 342-3). Jung's procedure, of first mentioning how a Latin poet had suggested that the real reason why Empedocles made the jump was because he wanted to be thought of as an immortal god before going straight on to offer his own suggestion (NZ ii 1217), is no accident: Horace's theory was for Jung purely subjective in origin, an obvious projection of his personal life as a Roman (ZL 70 §179), and this sets the scene for Jung's own amusing theory which will be based just as obviously on his own very personal and subjective experience. Sucking up every word as if it's the waters of life: RB 148, 315b; and for the entourage of devoted Jungians who typically "hung on Jung's every word" cf. R. Noll, The Aryan Christ (New York 1997) 187. "Flocked around him wanting to hear ...": B. Hannah, The archetypal symbolism of animals (Wilmette 2006) 392. NOTES TO PAGES 270-275 659 The passage is JP B26 (13 June 1958); see the brief paraphrase by S. Shamdasani, Quadrant 38/1 (2008) 25-6, who does well to translate Jung's original German as "repeat parrot -- fashion". "The great truth ... straight from the Master's hands?" TE 170 §263. °° For the archetypal saviour or magician forever lamenting, often with more than a touch of inflation, that his "great wisdom is never understood" see especially TE 228 §379 (cf. 233-7 §§389-97); IJ/P 95; and for saviour as magician, PT 262 §443. For Jung's persistent refrain that no one understands him or his insights, see e.g. JP 148, 160, 309; [JW 3-4; JZ ii 32, 299, 424, 453, 516, 530, 584, 586-9, 624; M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 60-1; E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 158; E. Falzeder, JJ 10/3 (2016) 18, 26. The cry of Merlin as the cry of the prophet whom literally no one understands: JP 366-7, MDR 216/228. For the golden cage of inflation see RB 316b, together with Jung's comment at the end of this same paragraph about the "true one" always having to renounce or disown himself. On his constant concern to prevent "the Master" from being caged, note also Cary de Angulo's draft letter to Jung dated 26 January 1924 (RB 213b; CBA); and for the Master and the disciple trapping each other, ending up caught "in the same boat", compare TE 234 §390. "So humanly understandable ... further destination whatever": ibid. 171 §265. "No one should deny ... daunts even the gods": S7'355 -- 7 §553; the difference in tone as well as content between what Jung says here about the sunset way and his original version of the same text, written forty years earlier, could hardly be more noticeable (JPPF 4/1, 1912, 386 = Psychology of the unconscious, New York 1916, 390-1; R.D. Scott, JAP 2, 1957, 206). For the particular turning point of the sun that Jung is describing, and its visionary implications within the 660 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY framework of his own life, compare RB 231-2 together with n.32; for the Nietzschean background to the theme of the sun setting, A. Del Caro and R.B. Pippin, Friedrich Nietzsche: Thus spoke Zarathustra (Cambridge 2006) 3 n.1; and for the practice of following the sun's path according to Parmenides as well as ancient magical traditions, DPW. *1 On the Red book as source and origin of all Jung's later work see JP 144, 147, 149, 177, 258; MDR 184/192, 190-1/199; V.W. Odajnyk, PP 53 (2010) 441; A. Jung, JAP 56 (2011) 665. Assertions by commentators that in their wisdom they understand the logic of his work far better than he did, and that the Red book has no practical bearing whatsoever on Jungian or any other "psychology", are predictably already sprouting up like mushrooms (W. Giegerich, Spring 83, 2010, 361-411; WJ. Hanegraaff in Religion und Wahnsinn um 1900, ed. L. Greisiger, A. van der Haven and 8. Schiiler, Wiirzburg 2017, 105-6). For criticisms of the Red book as an embarrassment that should never have been published see e.g. R.A. Segal, I//S 6 (2014) 74-9; D. Tacey, ibid. 264-7. On Jung's own embarrassment with its content as well as its style see JP 145, 169-70, and especially his crucial comments at 148; MDR 171/178. But to echo the words of the Red dook itself, it's not just grotesquely banal or hackneyed (RB 7, 262b; Tacey 265-6). It's hideously simple, ridiculously primitive, indistinguishable from a god of nature -- and exactly what we need (RBz 337b, cf. RB 339b). Or to give a sense of the even simpler language he would use to describe this book of his own unconscious at around the same time as he was working on it, it's not just banal but it's sick; it's not only mad but it's also divine (BB v 82, RBu 334 n.21). For the "disgusting" style of the unconscious and its "very bad taste", which one must learn to accept and allow for and not avoid but simply "observe dispassionately", note also Marie -- NOTES TO PAGES 275-277 661 Louise von Franz's comments, Alchemy (Toronto 1980) 193-4. Ironically she goes straight on to add that, in the alchemical text she is analyzing, she "would like to skip the next chapter for it is very disgusting". It's more than a little interesting that the great mystic and Sufi teacher, Ibn al -- Arabi, was far better able to handle (a word I use advisedly) this problem than von Franz the psychologist. See C. Addas, Quest for the red sulphur (Cambridge 1993) 48-9. >2 For Jungian psychology as a "rejection" of religion see e.g. S. Shamdasani, RB 211-12, together with his comment that to consider Jung "a mystic and a visionary" on the basis of his Red book would be just as wrong-minded as calling him a charlatan or a psychotic (JAP 55, 2010, 47). For the Red book as "not a religious work" because instead of leading to God it leads to the soul, see P. Bishop in Art, sciences et psychologie, ed. C. Maillard (Strasbourg 2011) 139-40. Compare Murray Stein's view of the Red book as demonstrating how "the mind of the psychologist rules in the New Age", a New Age "mentalized by the psychological mind" (JAP 57, 2012, 290, 294); or a Jungian's earlier pronouncement that "To be sure, there is no going back to Christianity, or to any other religion for that matter. For these, even while continuing to exist, are now subsumed under psychology" (G. Mogenson, The dove in the consulting room, Hove 2003, 172). Alternatively, it could be a little simpler as well as more helpful if one preferred to return to James Kirsch's account of the personal comments Jung made to him on this very same issue. "When I was working with him, the relationship of religion and psychology was a big problem for me. I asked him whether the two were really two different things, since all the holy scriptures were written by men and were based on human experiences of the Divine. He answered, 'they are one" (KT 4). 662 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY *3 "Religion can only be replaced by religion": FJ 323-4 §178] (11 February 1910: "Religion kann nur durch Religion ersetzt werden"); JL i 18; F.X. Charet, Spiritualism and the foundations of C.G. Jung's psychology (Albany 1993) 253. I have already documented the crude suppression of any reference to religion in the English-language edition of Jung's crucial comments to Freud during the same year (FJ 381-2 §206J, 11 August 1910). And to give just one other example, taken from comments he made almost half a century later: in November 1957 he communicated to his assistant, with the greatest care, that the act of explaining alchemy's essential relationship to psychology is directly equivalent to explaining alchemy as religion. He then goes straight on to describe how as soon as he had come to realize the essentially religious nature of alchemical tradition he found himself back at the very same place, and on the same solid ground, he had arrived at during the years of his underworld experiences that resulted in the Red book -- because he realized that the alchemists' experiences had also been his experiences and the other way around (JP 227). In other words: alchemy's relationship to psychology is alchemy's relationship to religion because psychology and religion are fundamentally the same, while the religious experiences of the alchemists were the same as Jung's own experiences at the time of the Red book because these were religious too. Unfortunately his assistant, Aniela Jaffé, in her usual style has interfered again with what he says; trivialized it and jumbled the details, forcing Jung in his published biography to talk confusedly about "religious philosophy" and other such things when he had said nothing of the kind (MDR 200/209). 54 "So long as religion ... Why this fear of psychology?": C.G. Jung, Psychologie und Alchemie (2TM ed., Zurich 1952) 25-32; cf. PA 12-17 §13-19. To Jung it was an indisputable truth that the NOTES TO PAGES 277-281 663 depths of the psyche are divine (compare e.g. JZ ii 237), and no one happened to be more appreciative than Henry Corbin of the fact that Jungian psychology is concerned by definition with the divine mystery of the soul (Revue de culture européenne 5, 1953, 14-15 = HJ 267-8). See also 4/ 89-90, where Corbin cites with full sympathy and approval Jung's protest that "The reproach of 'psychologism' applies only to a fool who thinks he has his soul in his pocket ... Should Meister Eckhart also be reproached with 'psychologism' when he says, 'God must be brought to birth in the soul again and again'?" (R. Wilhelm and C.G. Jung, The secret of the golden flower, London 1931, 129-30; AS 50 §75). For the soul as Sophia, Sapientia, the hidden wisdom of God, see RB 155 (the painting), 317 n.283; PT 235 §398 (the "Gnostic" Sophia); L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 24, 285-6 n.85. "Ina church ... as the altar itself": ACU 201 §369, 202 §380, and cf. 201 §370 for the crucial element of mysterious ambivalence; RB 317 n.283. "T have the feeling that this is a time ...": F/ 484 §269] (29 August 1911), to be read in conjunction with Jung's earlier and equally portentious letters about religion and religious secrecy (FJ 323-4 §178J, 381-2 §206J). Of course Jung knew very well that the word sophia was not just Alexandrian but ancient Greek in origin -- which means that when he points very specifically to Alexandrian terminology he is referring, in particular, to Sophia as Gnostic goddess. Presumably the printing of her name as Sopsia instead of Sophia by the official editors of the Freud -- Jung correspondence is designed to illustrate the depths to which wisdom has degenerated in the modern world. °° For Cary Fink, known as Cary de Angulo after her first marriage and Cary Baynes after her second, see W. McGuire, Bollingen (Princeton 1982), esp. 18-20; NZ 119-20, 170; D. 664 THREE ! THE SUNSET WAY Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 334 ("rigorously objective in every aspect of her life"), 359, 371 with 771 n.79, 579-80 with 830 n.51, 606; JSB 13-15; RB 212b; IJP ix -- xxi, xxxi-xxxiv. Note in particular her own account of how Jung decided to "turn over" to her all his work on the Red book to see what, as an "impartial observer", she would say about it because he trusted so much in her critical sense (draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 26 January 1924: RB 213b, CBA); his strong sense of need for her full collaboration (letter from Jung to de Angulo dated 13 December 1924, CBA); and his unconcealed respect for her exceptional forthrightness and honesty (ibid., 18 March 1926), although in later years he could get more than a little irritated with her rationalism (letter from Cary Baynes to Jung dated 23 January 1946 and from him to her dated 25 July 1946: CBA). "Every hour I spend with you ...": draft letter dated 25 September 1922 (CBA). Compare, for example, Tina Keller's emphasis on the potent atmosphere of prayerful mystery into which he helped to initiate her (R. Noll, The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 152; W.K. Swan, JAP 51, 2006, 500; The memoir of Tina Keller -- Jenny, New Orleans 2011, 23 §55) and even Jung's own light-hearted but telling comparison of his morning dream -- analysis to "morning worship" (FJ 377 §204J, 6 August 1910; J.E. Gedo, Annual of psychoanalysis 7, 1979, 78; note also RB 204a with n.111, 216a) as well as his striking references to the Christian sacrament (cf. e.g. E.A. Bennet, Meetings with Jung, Zurich 1985, 17 for his comment about the woman who burst into tears on hearing him give a lecture: "she got what was there -- like the Mass": and his statement to A. Storr, JAP 44, 1999, 535, "Every night you have the chance of the Eucharist"). "You are taking me into the inner dwelling house ...: draft letter from de Angulo to Jung dated 26 January 1924 (CBA); and compare her note of how, in this situation, so much delicacy is needed that even the weight of a single rose leaf NOTES TO PAGES 281-284 665 could be a crushing burden (ibid., 28 September 1922). The Red book as a personality in its own right, not to be approached aggressively or brusquely: ibid., 28 January 1924. "So full of magic ... shadows of past ages": ibid.; and compare her touching description of Jung's library, as home to the Red book, one week later (ibid., 5 February 1924). *6 "Your personality is that 'Kleinod' ... why it is so": draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 25 September 1922 (CBA). She then goes on to repeat a point she had made earlier: that for her he is no longer just an individual human person because he has been transformed, in her eyes, into an impersonal but intensely living symbol. For her use of the word "personality" here in a strictly Jungian sense, compare e.g. PT 460 §§789-90; TE 230 §382; DP 167-86 §§284-323; JS 223, 301, 328, 356, 364, 463. Jung's published statements about the jewel, or "Kleinod": Psychologische Typen (Zurich 1921) 254-63, 361-80 = PT 177-84 §§296-311, 258-72 §§ 434-60, focussing on Carl Spitteler's Prometheus and Epimetheus. Later, it will be noted, Jung will identify "Spitteler's jewel" with the philosophers' stone (PA 81 §103, 123 §160, 430 §514). For de Angulo's methodical study of the literature featured by Jung in Psychological types, see also her draft note dated 21 May 1924 (on Ernst Barlach's Der tote Tag: CBA); the English edition of the book, translated by her future husband, would appear in 1923. "The saviour is always a figure ... the impossible possible": PT' 262 §443. Incarnate Bodhisattva, Buddha, jewel in the lotus: ibid. 178 §§297-8, 259 § 436. "The saviour -- nature of the jewel ...": Psychologische Typen 374, cf. PT 268 § 453. >" For Jung's multiple quotations from Isaiah while describing the "Kleinod", or redeeming jewel, see PT' 261-5 §§438- -- 47; for the jewel as cornerstone, PA 78 §103. "It is in the Zoroastrian 666 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY teaching ... between god and man": SNZ 12 (cf. NZ i 12). For the Zoroastrian figure of the Saoshyant see e.g. J.R. Hinnells, Numen 16 (1969) 161-85; M. Boyce, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 47 (1984) 57-75; P. Kingsley, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 5 (1995) 197 with n.153; E. Albrile, Laurentianum 39 (1998) 433-53; P.O. Skjerve in Zoroastrian rituals in context, ed. M. Stausberg (Leiden 2004) 272-3; F.M. Kotwal and J.K. Choksy, ibid. 394; and note how uncannily relevant the etymology of the word Saoshyant, as meaning "he who will make the world swell again with the vital juices of life" (Skjzrve 273 with n.34), is to Jung's essential intuition in 1914 of his own world mission (M@DR 170/176; RB 231a). "Called out through the need of the time, the emergencies of the actual epoch": SNZ 14 (cf. NZ i 14); and note Jung's comments here on the various Buddhas and Bodhisattvas (SNZ 13, NZ i 13). When he also refers here to Nietzsche's experiences of the wise old man archetype as an immensely potent historical figure that carries with it the taste and the flavour of previous centuries, the unmistakeable sense of the actual presence of an ancient past -- as a separate identity inside himself which had existed for thousands upon thousands of years since the beginning of eternity, and which brings all our illusions of time to a stop by bringing 5000 BC so close to 2000 AD that it can seem to be in the very next room (SNZ 13-14, NZ i 13-14) -- Jung is of course referring to his own inner experiences as well, following his exact and explicit guidelines in such matters (ACU 144 -- 6 §§253- -- 4). "Prophets, appear ... give birth to a new truth": SNZ 24 (cf. NZ i 24); for revelation always accompanying confusion compare JL i 69, and for the supreme saviour figure or Saoshyant as father of all prophets see also NZ ii 1033. "Reason must always seek ... from the side it was least expected": PT 260-1 §438. The solution only offered by prophecy: ibid. 261-5 §§438- -- 48. NOTES TO PAGES 284-288 667 *8 'Twisting her bowels: draft note from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 21 May 1924 (CBA); compare Jung's own comments on the spirit of the depths completely burning up his entrails, and on one's bowels being wracked in the process of being crucified (Red book, folio i verso = RB 230a; 136 = 310a). For the stream of his visions and dreams leading up to the outbreak of war see RB 201-2, 226, 231a, 241b, 336b, also 305-6; I/P 43-8; JS 232-4; JP 145-6; MDR 169-70/175 -- 6. The quotations from Isaiah: Red book, folio i recto = RB 229; for Jung's early readings of Isaiah see the comments by James Kirsch, PP 6 (1975) 56. "Thus it was presented as a prophetic work": S. Shamdasani, C.G. Jung: a biography in books (New York 2012) 117, cf. RB 203a; so e.g. J. Beebe, PP 53 (2010) 431; V.W. Odajnyk, ibid. 439-51; L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 30 and, with some puzzlement, in Jung's 'Red book' for our time, ed. M. Stein and T. Arzt, i (Asheville 2017) 103-23; S.A. Hoeller, ibid. 92-6. »? Isaiah 53:1 -- 4, 9:6, 35:1 -- 2 plus 5 -- 8 are quoted in this particular sequence at Red book, folio i recto = RB 229; Isaiah 53:1-3, 9:6 and 35:5 -- 8 are quoted in the same sequence at PT 261 -- 4 §§ 439-45, But note also that at PT 249 n.159 Jung quotes approvingly from a page in William Blake's Marriage of heaven and hell where Blake, himself, has just referred his readers to Isaiah chapter 35. For blindness see Isaiah 35:5; PT 172 §285, 185 §313, 190 §320, 263 §445. Unsuitable, unacceptable, inappropriate: ibid. 266 §449. The "Epimethean" retreat into collective rationalism, or rationalistic collectivism: ibid. 184-5 §312; 189-90 §§318-20; 260-1 §§438 -- 40. Similarly, Jeremiah's words about prophecy are not only cited by Jung at the opening to the second book of Lider novus but are also quoted by him in Psychological types -- as part of a sustained argument that fantasy and imagination have been 668 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY ruthlessly suppressed along with Gnosticism throughout the course of Christian history, and cast out just like the precious jewel (Jeremiah 23:16 and 25-8, RB 1, 259a, PT'52-9 §§78 -- 86). If recent commentators (e.g. A. Schweizer, J] 5/3, 2011, 79-80) paid a little attention to the clear reasons given by Jung himself for citing these passages from Jeremiah in Psychological types, it would be so much easier for them to understand their real function and purpose in the Red book. For the chronology of Jung's work on Psychological types, and its relevance to the Red book, see PI'v; RB 198b, 215a, 222-3, 255 n.241; B. Hannah, Jung, his life and work (New York 1976) 132-4; V.W. Odajnyk, PP 56 (2013) 310-28; QPT.- °° "Belongs to the generality ... listen to revelations": W. Giegerich, Spring 83 (2010) 379-80. Giegerich's "review" has also been criticized by others (e.g. 8. Rowland, Remembering Dionysus, Abingdon 2017, 44-68); but the psychological significance of the fact, duly underscored by Jung himself (PT 260-1 §§437-8), that the most common reaction to the jewel is to welcome it at first with rapturous hymns of excitement before finding very rational ways of rejecting it later seems to have been quite lost on modern interpreters of the Red book. For the usual apologies nowadays that the Red book is prophetic and yet not prophetic see e.g. M. Stein, JAP 55 (2010) 433; A. Schweizer, JJ 5/3 (2011) 81; A. Haaning, JAP 59 (2014) 26 (Jung finds himself "adopting a certain prophetic mode in these opening passages, but the intention is not to lay claim to being a new prophet or the mouthpiece of a god"); N. Pilard, Jung and intuition (London 2015) 92. The denials that Jung's pre-war dreams were prophetic come in a variety of pleasingly rationalistic flavours: NL 103-4; N. Lewin, Jung on war, politics and Nazi Germany (London 2009) 270-1; W.J. Hanegraaff in Religion und Wahbnsinn um 1900, ed. L. Greisiger, A. van NOTES TO PAGES 288-291 669 der Haven and 8. Schiiler (Wiirzburg 2017) 102, 113. The rhetorical flourishes: Stein 433 (in spite of the Red book's "rhetorical flourishes, Jung decisively rejects the role of prophet/ avatar"); already the published version of Memories, dreams, reflections had strategically replaced Jung's own statements about the Red book speaking the language of prophecy with the statement that it spoke the language of rhetoric (JP 144-5, 169; MDRC 121; MDR 171/177 -- 8). On the "tension" between prophetic and anti-prophetic that "runs through" the Red book see S. Shamdasani, C.G. Jung: a biography in books (New York 2012) 117. * For some time, writers have played with applying Jung's theory of synchronicity to his own prophetic experiences during 1913 and 1914 (cf. e.g. R. Aziz, C.G. Jung's psychology of religion and synchronicity, Albany 1990, 206; S. Shamdasani, RB 220b). But the clearest statements of the modern, enlightened view that this scientific theory was a very deliberate and focused effort on his part to find an exit from the murky world of prophecy are by Joseph Cambray: J//S 3 (2011) 110-24, International journal of psychoanalysis 94 (2013) 418 and in The Red book, ed. 'T. Kirsch and G. Hogenson (London 2014) 47 -- 51; George Bright has shrewdly noted that the one person most "relieved to have found an exit from The Red Book's challenging world of non-rational Divine power and magic" is not so much Jung as Cambray himself (JAP 59, 2014, 287). The new, politically correct tendency to remove the word "prophetic" and substitute the much more proper term "synchronistic" when discussing those visions and dreams that led Jung to start his work on the Red book -- because "otherwise it gets a little bit too magical, forecasting the future and things' -- is also quite evident in Murray Stein's The red book: a global seminar (Asheville Jung Center DVD: Asheville 2010) 1:16:29-1:18:40. 670 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY But Jung himself had no problem whatsoever, at least in the right circumstances, admitting quite unashamedly that he had the ability to forecast the future because there was something inside him which just knew such things (JP 205, cf. 278). 6 Jung had already spoken out articulately, as well as passionately, in defence of prophetic dreams and visions years before meeting Freud: see ZZ 42-3 §§131 -- 4 (1897), where he cites Old Testament prophets as examples, and compare e.g. SL 298-9 §§710-13 (1905, again citing Old Testament prophets), JM 101-2 (1935), JL ii 536 (1960). He evidently failed to receive any bulletin or update about synchronicity because up until the time of his death he was still describing his pre-war dreams and visions of 1913 and 1914 as examples of precognition, genuine precognition, seeing into the future, premonition. See especially JP 145-6 (30 September 1957), where his language of miraculous prescience or foresight has not changed an iota from the language he used during his earliest work on the Red book almost half a century earlier (folio iv recto = RB 241b); M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 88-9 = JS 462-3. On the fundamental, and non-negotiable, importance of prophetic visions or dreams for Jung's worldview see e.g. MDR 313-14/340-1; M.-L. von Franz in ZL xviii; J.E. Gedo, Annual of psychoanalysis 7 (1979) 80-1. Three older writers who helped to buttress his sympathies in this regard were Swedenborg (SZ 296-9 §§705- 14; P. Bishop, Car! Jung, London 2014, 75; S. Shamdasani, History of psychiatry 27, 2016, 384), Schopenhauer (JM 103, 110) and von Schubert (ibid. 103, 147); and for his very self-conscious determination to get back even beyond these predecessors so he could revive the "antique science" of ancient Greek dream interpretation see ibid. 104. "The palm of honour ... existence of prophetic dreams": W.V. Harris, Dreams and NOTES TO PAGES 291-292 671 experience in classical antiquity (Cambridge, MA 2009) 233. On the grassroots respect for the prophetic value of dreams which continued, regardless of Aristotle, both among people in general and among ancient physicians in particular see $.R.F. Price, Past and present 113 (1986) 11-12, 23. As for Freud: although he sometimes is presented as moderately open to the possibility of prophetic dreams, this can be misleading. In his earlier work he did try at least to create an appearance of being non-judgemental, before invariably allowing his cynicism to have the last word (cf. e.g. The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud vi, London 1960, 261-3); and later, even after he had started warming towards the reality of telepathy, his explicitly Aristotelian rejection of prophetic dreams only hardened (R. Aziz, C.G. Jung's psychology of religion and synchronicity, Albany 1990, 106-7; K. Frieden, Freud's dream of interpretation, Albany 1990, 95-107, 130). *' "To avoid the task ... when you accepted it": draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 5 February 1924 (CB). Her mention of the grace or "Gnade" -- to follow her own faithful use of Jung's original German word for it -- that at last descended on him is a reference to Red book folio i verso, which has been very poorly translated at RB 230b as "mercy". For the traditional scenario of Hebrew prophets questioning and challenging as well as fighting and even denying the role of prophet I already cited earlier some of the most typical passages from Exodus, Jeremiah, Zechariah, not to mention the book of Jonah; Anson Laytner's book Arguing with God (Lanham 1990); and one emphatic recent reminder of the ancient prophet's characteristic "reluctance to accept the role. Even so, a prophet is compelled to speak ... Finally, a prophet most often rejects the designation" (M. Dean -- Otting in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion, 2TM ed., New York 2014, ed. D.A. 6/2 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY Leeming, 1389). Also essential reading for any commentator on Jung is the extensive modern literature about the prophet Jeremiah's "Confessions" of his disputes and struggles with God (cf. J.A. Thompson, The book of Jeremiah, Grand Rapids 1980, 88-92; A.R. Diamond, The confessions of Jeremiah in context, Shefheld 1987; R.R. Laha, Jeremiah, Louisville 2002, 40-9). For Jung's own awareness of the constant conflicts and tensions traditionally endured by prophets, together with his gruesome emphasis on the unavoidable need to face crushing and unbearable tension along the way of individuation, see e.g. PR 18-19 §32 with RB 308-18. In ancient Greek tradition, too, such conflicts of course reach their tragic height with the prophetic figure of Cassandra. On the other hand, there are those who seem to find direct support for claiming "Jung decisively rejects the role of prophet/avatar" in the fact that he argumentatively "asks questions of his inner teachers" throughout the Red book "and raises objections to what they are asking him to take aboard" (M. Stein, JAP 55, 2010, 433); and even stranger is the notion that Jung refused to be a prophet because, far from representing a "whole human being" who has become ready to carry the ethical burdens of humanity, the archetypal figure of the prophet is a "winged solar hero who escapes the gravity of the earth" (A. Schweizer, JJ 5/3, 2011, 81). But perhaps the most unfortunate example of misunderstanding inside Jungian circles is the case of James Kirsch, who in his book-length study of prophecy decided to disqualify the nineteenth-century rabbi Hile Wechsler from being a "true prophet" precisely because of his inner reluctance and conflicts about accepting the prophetic role (The reluctant prophet, Los Angeles 1973, 190-2). With striking inconsistency, although in line with his naive idealization of the ancient Hebrew prophets, Kirsch also explained that when Isaiah expresses horror as well as reluctance at the prospect of NOTES TO PAGES 292-294 673 his own prophetic mission this is because psychologically and very commendably "he remains differentiated from what is happening within him" (JK 273). It would be nice to assume that Kirsch might have been logical enough to apply the same explanation not only to Isaiah, but also to Rabbi Wechsler as well as to Carl Jung. 64 "No religious experience please ... 2,000 years ago": letter from Jung to Eugene Rolfe dated 14 July 1959 and published in Rolfe's Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 132. On the direct relationship between orthodox Christianity's crushing of Gnosticism and its suppression of religious experience see especially PT 52~9 §§80-81; also PR 97 §160, Aion 178-81 §§276-81, SL 826-9 §§1827-33; and for Jung's long-held conviction that the essential purpose of the Christian Church has always been to block all direct, personal experience compare e.g. PR 553 §903. For prophets as the writers of the books produced by God see in particular 2 Peter 1:20-1, "First and foremost you need to understand that all scriptural prophecy which has been written is not the prophet's own explanation, because no prophecy has ever been fetched by any human's will. On the contrary, the human speaks straight from God while being carried by the Holy Spirit"; Jung was of course intimately familiar with the Christian doctrines surrounding this prophetic role (PR 144 §217). "Above all, write exactly (getreu) what you see": RB 252b, cf. L.S. Owens, The Gnostic 3 (2010) 31-2; Jung himself has just (RB 251a) described the experience of becoming a prophet. The unfortunate notion (L. Corbett, JJ 5/3, 2011, 67) that for Jung the figure of Elijah "was fiercely antagonistic" to any religious innovation and so "would be a figure with whom Jung has to deal" could hardly be more mistaken (ACU 141 §247, 145 §253; SZ 673-8 §§1518-31). On the traditional need to report "exactly what you have 674 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY seen" after descending to the underworld, see especially the Zoroastrian Ardé Viraz namag, ed. P. Gignoux (Paris 1984) 101.3-4, "convey exactly (rastihad) what you have seen", 3.5-7, "tell us exactly (rastihd) everything you have seen", 1.20, "I will go to fetch this message accurately (drustihaé) and convey it exactly (rastiha)"; 3.14, "and everything he said was written down accurately (drust), clearly and in detail". Compare also Parmenides fr. 4.1 Diels = fr. 9.1 Gemelli Marciano, together with Reality 55-9; Plato, Republic 614d (angelon anthrépois genesthat ton ekei kat ... theasthai panta ta en toi topot) and 619b; Dante, Inferno 32.7-12 together with RB 252 n.213. For the antiquity of the traditions contained in the Arda Viraz namag see P. Kingsley, Studia iranica 23 (1994) 193 and n.25. For its connections with Parmenides note e.g. Rea/ity 563; and with Dante's Divine comedy, E. Yarshater in Persian presence in the Islamic world, R.G. Hovannisian and G. Sabagh (Cambridge 1998) 32 plus the references at n.130. *> Without even trying to document all the features of prophetic language and style in the Red book from the very first pages onwards, I will just note the irony in Shamdasani's assertion that although the book is certainly presented as a prophetic work "Yet at the same time, Jung eschewed presenting himself as a prophet: "There is only one way and that is your way ... May each go his own way ..."" (C.G. Jung: a biography in books, New York 2012, 117). First, Shamdasani seems not to have noticed that simply for Jung to announce the existence of one single way (RB 231b, 308b) is already for him to speak as a prophet; the same prophetic language continues throughout (compare e.g. 297 n.187, reading "tittle", which is a blatant echo of Matthew 5:17-18) and the closest parallel to his particular announcement here is to be found, very significantly, in Parmenides ("There is only one tale of a path left to tell": NOTES TO PAGES 294-296 675 fr. 8.1-2 Diels = fr. 14B.7-8 Gemelli Marciano, cf. Reality 157-60 with the Zoroastrian parallel cited at 563). Second, it also has escaped him that this paradoxical declaration about only one way existing but everyone having to go their own way is a deliberate riddle and that prophets in general -- as well as the Jung of the Red book -- very deliberately speak in riddles. Shamdasani appears, in short, not to have realized that a true classical prophet is no modern guru but is made to play a totally different game. For the whole of humanity as "ein verblendetes Geschlecht", a blinded and deluded race behaving like brutes, see RBu 296b (cf. RB 297b). The theme of blindness is already present on the first page of the Red book, in the form of Isaiah's announcement that "the eyes of the blind shall be opened"; and is immediately taken up on the second page in the form of Jung's confession that he, like everyone, had been blinded by the spirit of his time before being unblinded by the spirit of the depths (Red book, folio i recto and verso; RB 229). But it also should be noted that Jung's language in describing humanity as a "verblendetes Geschlecht", such a blinded and deluded race, belongs to the standard prophetic language of his own time: see e.g. Samuel Hirsch, Die Messiaslehre der Juden in Kanzelvortragen (Leipzig 1843) 243 ("du, verblendetes Geschlecht!"); Saul Kaatz, Das Wesen des prophetischen Judentums (Berlin 1907) 88 ("ein stindiges, verblendetes Geschlecht"). For Parmenides' powerful portrayal, after his own return from the underworld, of the whole human race as blind and deluded and deaf (4roto: eidotes ouden ... képhoi homés tuphloi te tethépotes akrita phula) see fr. 6.4 -- -7 Diels = fr. 13.5 -- 8 Gemelli Marciano; also fr. 1.34-6 Diels = fr. 14.3-5 Gemelli Marciano; IDPW 221-3, Reality 83- 8, 105-7, 120-5; for Empedocles' prophetic language see e.g. E. Norden, Agnostos theos (Leipzig 1913) 132-3, 198-200 with ENM 351 and APMM 370 with ENM 348 n.31. "The masses 676 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY ... Strike it dead": PA 480-1 §563, a passage that deserves close comparison with RB 297b. For similar expressions compare e.g. PT 185 §313; SZ 316 §754, 571 §1316; JZ ii 209. °° In Psychological types Jung brings his chapter on the "Kleinod" or precious jewel to a close by quoting a few words from William Blake and then emphasizing, with unusual formality, how simply and effectively they summarize his entire discussion (PT 272 §460, cf. 332 §559 "Blake's intuition did not err ..."; he also quotes Blake at 249 n.159). As the Red book's editor has well noted, considering the overlap in time between Jung's work on Psychological types and his most intense involvement with the Red book this is hardly insignificant -- especially in view of the extent to which the Red book's extraordinary "combination of text and image recalls the illuminated works of William Blake" (S. Shamdasani, C.G. Jung: a biography in books, New York 2012, 110-20, cf. RB 203b). But what hasn't yet been noticed is the equally extraordinary extent to which the text of the Red book is modelled on Blake's prophetic writings. To mention just one example here, because its implications are so rich: the Red book opens with a peculiarly enigmatic scene. In the middle of Jung's confrontation with the duelling claims being made on him by the spirit of his time and the spirit of the depths, suddenly the spirit of the time approaches him holding huge books that he lays before him. The books contain all of Jung's knowledge; their leaves are made of brass, and adamantine words have been carved into their metal pages by an iron pen (Red book, folio i verso; cf. RB 230b). Why this spirit of our time should be carrying such books will seem a complete mystery until one remembers Blake's most famous character, Urizen, carrying his books that contain all the knowledge of our world: "But still his books he bore in his strong hands and his iron pen / ... the books remaind still NOTES TO PAGE 296 677 unconsumd / Still to be written & interleavd with brass & iron & gold / Time after time for such a journey none but iron pens / Can write & adamantine leaves recieve ..." (The complete poetry and prose of William Blake, ed. D.V. Erdman, 2" ed., Berkeley 1982, 348-9; cf. M.O. Percival, William Blake's circle of destiny, New York 1938, 23-4, a book Jung would devour as soon as it was published). This passage, from the section of Blake's Four Zoas called "Night the sixth" (a title which will sound rather familiar to anyone acquainted with Jung's Red book), almost says it all about Urizen or "your reason": the deceptive, blind, proud, stern, inexorable demiurge who does everything in his dwindling power to pretend he is the supreme authority although he is just the feeblest reflection of the real divine spirit or even of the primordial reason which Urizen was originally meant to be. And to help fill out the bigger picture I will simply add that for Blake the opposite pole to Urizen, or Reason, is Imagination: the spirit of prophecy. Of course the true significance of the Red book for Jung himself lay in the very specific fact that its contents derive from the myth- making imagination completely banished by the principle of reason which is the proud, blind, deceptive spirit of our time (cf. Shamdasani, RB 208a). What this means is that here in the work of Blake, not to mention other figures such as Paracelsus or Jacob Boehme, the mythical underpinning of Jung's entire Red book is openly presented and revealed. But then the interesting reaction begins of Jung slowly distancing himself from Blake: gradually, inevitably concealing his vestiges. In 1930 he would still be willing to speak charitably about Blake's access, through his mythological imagery, to the primordial experience of the unconscious; then, anything positive he had to say about him would almost absurdly be delegated to a little footnote; and twenty years later he could hardly wait to discredit him in the very same way that his no. 1 personality 678 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY couldn't wait to discredit the Gnostics (SM 91 §142, 96-7 §151; PR 555 with n.41; JZ i 513-14, ii 17). Some things, though, are not so easy to conceal. In his personal copy of The writings of William Blake there is a single bookmark that he inserted at a very particular place, beside a full-page reproduction of one of Blake's most powerful drawings. It's called "The Sun of Reason" and shows a man kneeling submissively in the worship of a monstrous decaying sun: a sun which symbolizes not just the secular religion that humanity under the influence of Urizen has created out of reason but the hollow rational creeds that orthodox priests, also thanks to Urizen, have created out of religion (The writings of William Blake, ed. G. Keynes, London 1925, i, plate xxvi: compare Blake's verbal reference to "the dark globe of Urizen" in his Book of Urizen, D.W. Dorrbecker, Huntington library quarterly 52, 1989, 56-9, 71 n.54, 72-3 n.67). Needless to say, this harmonizes perfectly with Jung's own narrative about the high priests whose rationality obliges them to banish the "Kleinod" or precious jewel as a disgusting sacrilege (PT 260-1 §§437-8, 266-9 §§ 451-5). It also harmonizes perfectly with his fury at the rationalism and rigidity of a Church that denounces even the possibility of a "new book" as blasphemy (E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 132). But far more important, it shows why commentators on Jung have been so terrified to draw attention to his constant denigrating and even demonizing of reason throughout his published writings -- because this attitude of his, just like Blake's own visions of Urizen, derives from the world of prophecy. For general comments on Blake's "demonizing" of reason see K. Raine, Wiliam Blake (London 1970) 146-52; P. Cantor, Creature and creator (Cambridge 1984) 29-30; P. Ackroyd, Blake (New York 1995) 23, 325. Reason, in Blake, as the opposite pole of both imagination and prophecy: Percival 36-9, 69; S.F. Damon, A Blake dictionary (2TM ed., Hanover, NOTES TO PAGES 296-298 679 NH 2013) 195, 322, 419-20, 426; Raine 57; A. Ostriker in William Blake and the moderns, ed. R.J. Bertholf and A.S. Levitt (Albany 1982) 115-16. Urizen as blinding and blinded (cf. RB 229b): Percival 22-3, 69, 182. As king of pride (cf. RB 229-30): Damon 419-21; Cantor 31-2. As deceptive (cf. ACU 93 §173): Percival 23 -- 4. For Urizen's books of brass and iron see Damon 424. *" In the Bible see especially John 4:16-19, where the woman tells Jesus "I see you are a prophet" (theéré hoti prophétés ei su) not because he has just told the future but because he has just shown that he knows her past. For ancient Mesopotamia see e.g. M. Neujahr's Predicting the past in the ancient Near East (Providence 2012) and, for the familiar expression "The future will be like the past", S. Parpola's Assyrian prophecies (Helsinki 1997) xlix, xvi, 6, 14. Empedocles, prophecy and the past: J.-P. Vernant, Journal de psychologie normale et pathologique 56 (1959) 14-18; ENM 339-43, 350 n.37. "Ancient crimes": Plato, Phaedrus 244d -- e;, Vernant 14, W. Burkert, The orientalizing revolution (Cambridge, MA 1992) 125-6. Cassandra: Aeschylus, Agamemnon 1178-1201. Epimenides: Aristotle, Rhetoric 1418a23 -- 5 (peri ton esomenén ouk emanteueto alla peri ton gegonotén men adélén de) = Poetae epici graeci, ed. A. Bernabé, 11/3 (Berlin 2007) 145; but even in conveying this valid, and important, point Aristotle is unable to hide his cynicism or sarcasm about Epimenides and prophecy as a whole (E.M. Cope and J.E. Sandys, Aristotle: Rhetoric, Cambridge 1877, iii 202). For Epimenides' atabasis see e.g. G.G. Stroumsa, Hidden wisdom (2 ed., Leiden 2005) 172; IDPW 102, 214-16. On Aristotle's rationalizing of memory and devaluing of the past see Vernant 28-9. The state which is neither sleep nor waking: IDPW 79-80, 110-11, 245. 680 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY 68 "And so I became a prophet ... the wild animals": RBu 251a (cf. RB 251a). The Red book repeatedly ties a knowledge of the future to a knowledge of the primordial past -- in perfect agreement with the ancient notion of prophets as those who know fa f' eonta ta t' essomena pro t' eonta, "the things that are and that shall be and that have been" (Homer, J/ad 1.70). This is the "panoptic vision" both of the gods and of humans initiated into the ways of the gods (on the "simultaneous 'sight' of past, present and future; divine omniscience stems precisely from the possession of panoptic vision" cf. G. Manetti, Theories of the sign in classical antiquity, Bloomington, IN 1993, 15) which is well known to classical scholars but frighteningly alien to students of Jung. It was also very familiar to Goethe in his overtly prophetic texts, as a form of vision altogether alien to our "verblendete Welt" or blinded world ("... Whoever knows the past understands what is to come ...": Weissagungen des Bakis 16 = Gothe's neue Schriften vii, Berlin 1800, 318-19, cf. H.S. Jantz, The soothsayings of Bakis, Baltimore 1966, 33). And it was even given a characteristically pragmatic twist by Winston Churchill during the war years ("The longer you can look back, the farther you can look forward. This is not a philosophical or political argument -- any oculist will tell you this is true": The Lancet 243, 11 March 1944, 349 = W.S. Churchill, The dawn of liberation, London 1945, 24, cf. R.M. Langworth, Churchill by himself, London 2008, 25, 576). For Jung's intimate familiarity with this perspective see RB 247b, 250a, 253b, 304a, 305a, and especially 306a (gifts of ancient things which are indicative of the future), 316a (Philemon's knowledge of the future is linked to his immeasurable past), 357 (Elijah's knowledge of the future is linked by Jung to his connection with what is primordially old), 358a (Elijah sees the future by looking into the past); also PT 400-1 §§659 -- 60. Ironically, many years before the Red book's publication James Olney already realized NOTES TO PAGE 301 681 that "Jung read the future, as did Yeats, out of the past" thanks to the care with which he traced this prophetic ability of both Yeats and Jung straight back to Empedocles (The rhizome and the flower, Berkeley 1980, 172-3); but now it's a sign of the times we live in that Christine Maillard can write a supposedly authoritative paper on the Red book and its "obsession" with the future without pointing, even once, to the fundamental importance of the past (Cahiers jungiens de psychanalyse 134, 2011, 119-31). Jung's constant linkage of the primordial past with "das Kommende'", or what is to come, is faithfully preserved in the record of the extraordinary attempts made by his colleague Josef Lang during October 1917 to enter the psyche of Hermann Hesse and engrave inside it "the primordial scripture of humanity" which is preserved on "the tablets of the law of what is to come" ("die Urschrift der Menschen, die Du sie lehren muft, die Gesetzestafeln des Kommenden": H. Ball, Hermann Hesse, Berlin 1927, 159). Fortunately we still happen to have the text of Jung's solemn warning to Lang, written less than three months later, that the only way to avoid the inflation of identifying with the role of prophet is if we refuse ever to forget that "in the first place we have to do the work on the unconscious for ourselves" rather than anybody else (letter to J.B. Lang dated 17 January 1918, cf. RB 207a; the words "for ourselves" are underlined in the original). Richard Noll deserves all due credit for noting the remarkable significance of Lang's psychological experiments with Hesse (The Jung cult, 2TM ed., New York 1997, 233-5, 367-8 n.53); but he had no access to Jung's warning letter and probably, in his determination to present Jung as the deliberate founder of a religious cult, would have ignored it anyway. As for Jung's own visions of the future in the Red book: far from being utopian (Maillard 122, 131), almost all of them are visions of sheer horror at the terrors lying ahead (cf. e.g. RB 198-9 with n.45, 274b, 306a, 682 THREE ! THE SUNSET WAY 335a, 345b). Leaving the future alone: RB 306b. One of the most desperate sections in the Red book: ibid. 306-12. It will be noted that the poignant injunction to hold the incomprehensible riddles in one's heart and become pregnant with them (308b) is pure Pythagoreanism: APMM 230-1 with n.48, 299 with n.35, 363 with n.12, 366 with n.20; IDPW 28, 120. Suspension of the will and stopping of the mind: RB 311b; cf. 238a and JV ii 1125 ("whatever one thinks is an expectation; it is trying to force God; one is whining about something and trying to squeeze something out of him; therefore, think of nothing"). For the excruciating process of being transformed, not into what one will be but into what one always has been, compare also Jung's account of the individual who has experienced the inner katabasis and nekyia of descending into the underworld only to return as a complete human being: "This man stands opposed to the man of the present, because he is the one who ever is as he was, whereas the other is what he is only for the moment" (SM 139-40 §213). The salvation that comes from the place you would least have expected: RB 311b (compare PT 260-2 §§438-43, ACU 157-8 §267). "Always it's something primordially ancient ... in a new time": RBu 310a (cf. RB 311b). The accompanying image in the Red book of the charioteer with his celestial horses (RBu 309-10 = RB 311, cf. e.g. JPPF 4/1, 1912, 321 = ST 279 §423) derives from ancient sources; but Jung's criticism of the chariot-driver who, through his noble will and intention, interferes with the future is primarily a rejection of the rational charioteer as portrayed by Plato (Phaedrus 246a -- 256b, cf. PT 544 §963, NZ ii 846). His uniquely pragmatic valuation here of the "primordially ancient" is of course the exact opposite of the naive aspiration to "return to antiquity" (PT 187-8 §§315-16). Note also Wolfgang Pauli's favourite expression during the early 1950s, "das noch Altere ist immer das Neue", NOTES TO PAGES 301-302 683 "the even older is always the new" (PB iv/I 386-7, 389 n.3, 400; iv/II 343; S. Gieser, The innermost kernel, Berlin 2005, 195) as well as Henry Corbin's equally fine account of psychological integration in his Philosophie iranienne et philosophie comparée (Paris 1985) 79: "It's not a question of going off and making oneself at home in a fictitious past. It's a question of preparing inside oneself a home for the future of that past. This is a process of integration in the most fundamental sense." 6? Jung to Freud on reincarnating the Gnostic Sophia: FJ 484 §269] (29 August 1911). For the act of giving birth to the ancient in the new as, itself, a Gnostic or alchemical process cf. e.g. Aion 181 §281. The image of the jewel in the marketplace: PT 267-9 §§452-5. Philemon and Jung as father and son: RB 348-56. Prophétén patér polyphilos Philémén: RB 154; the official edition of the Red book mistranslates prophétén patér as "Father of the Prophet" (ibid. 317 n.282). I should add that Jung's phrase "father of the prophets" is an obvious echo of the biblical expression "sons of the prophets", which referred to the prophets gathered under the leadership of Elijah: for the ancient biblical language about fathers of prophets and sons of prophets, with both the fathers and the sons being quite naturally prophets themselves, see J.G. Williams, Journal of biblical literature 85 (1966) 344-8; and for Jung, himself, as son of Elijah cf. e.g. RB 368a. Philémén tin prophétin propator: L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 24 with 286 n.86; Man and his symbols, ed. C.G. Jung (New York 1964) 198. The ancient Gnostic Propatér, or primordial father of the depths, was a figure of the most obvious significance for Jung. See for example the pencil markings in his copy of E. Klebba's Des heiligen Irenaus funf Bucher gegen die Haresien (Munich 1912) i 3-4 and note that here, at the very start of Irenaeus' famous attack on the Gnostics, Propatér is presented 684 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY as the alternative title for Bythos or the unspeakable spirit of the Deep (Against the heresies 1.1.1, cf. e.g. JL ii 132 with n.2); even without this confirmation, there could never be any doubting that the Red book's crucial contest between "the spirit of this time" and "the spirit of the depths" has been directly inspired by Gnosticism (Owens 27-8). For general literature on, and references to, the Gnostic Propatér see also Irenaeus 1.6.3 (crucially stating that the most secret and mysterious name of Propatér is Anthrépos, or "Man") and 1.12 (citing Isaiah); Hippolytus, Refutation of all heresies 6.43.5, 6.48.3; F-M.-M. Sagnard, La gnose valentinienne et le témoignage de Saint Irénée (Paris 1947) 653 sv. Propatér, C.A. Baynes, A Coptic Gnostic treatise contained in the Codex Brucianus (Cambridge 1933) 209 s.vv. "Forefather", "Forefather" and "Forefather Deep"; V. Macdermot, The books of Jeu and the untitled text in the Bruce codex (Leiden 1978) 218-23, 258-79, 304-5 (228-30, 248-58, 271 Schmidt) with 219 n.3; J.D. Turner in Nag Hammadi codices XI, XI, XIII, ed. CW. Hedrick (Leiden 1990) 248; Corpus hermeticum, ed. A.D. Nock and A.~J. Festugiére (Paris 1946-54) iii 7, 11 n.19, 14, iv 4, 10; Papyri graecae magicae (2TM ed., ed. K. Preisendanz and A. Henrichs, Stuttgart 1973-74) i 132-3 (PGM IV.1988-9) and ii 74 (PGM XII.236-7) with A. Dieterich, Kleine Schriften (Leipzig 1911) 18-19; Iamblichus, On the mysteries 8.4 with G. Shaw, Theurgy and the soul (University Park, PA 1995) 113 n.9; R.M. van den Berg, Proclus' hymns (Leiden 2001) 264. The Latin alchemical text quoted on the mural at Bollingen: Artis auriferae volumen secundum (Basle 1593) 239-40; cf. PA 109-10 §140. 7" On the archetypal prophet who "neither speaks nor hides but offers a sign" see the famous saying by Jung's favourite author Heraclitus, fr. 7 Gemelli Marciano = C.H. Kahn, The art and thought of Heraclitus (Cambridge 1979) 42-3, 123-4; and for the NOTES TO PAGES 302-305 685 ancient tradition of speaking to those who have eyes to see and ears to hear cf. 4PMM 370, Reality 433. Zarathustra, Buddha, Christ, Mani, Muhammad: NZ i 12-14, 45, 492-3, ii 852, 1296, 1531; draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 26 January 1924 (CBA), cf. RB 213b; L.S. Owens and 8.A. Hoeller in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2TM ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 979. For the historical dating of Zarathustra see P. Kingsley, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 53 (1990) 245-65 and Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 5 (1995) 173-209 with e.g. F. Grenet in The Wiley Blackwell companion to Zoroastrianism, ed. M. Stausberg and Y.S-D. Vevaina (Chichester 2015) 21-2; the return by Martin West to dating him as late as the seventh century BC is contradicted by both the Greek and Iranian evidence (Hellenica iii, Oxford 2013, 89-109). "He has been Christ ... born again": NZ i 45. "The one that goes and the one that comes": ibid. 44. "Only now and then": draft letter from de Angulo to Jung dated 25 September 1922 (CBA); for the periodic reappearances cf. also RB 149 = 316a. "Rare phenomenon": PT 268 §453. Naturally this all brings Jung very close to the teachings of the Theosophists (JP 101). "Whenever there is a decline ...": RB 154 left margin, citing an English version of Bhagavad gita 4.7-8; for Jung's acquaintance at the time with the Gizé as well as related literature see /PPF 4/1 (1912) 209 n.2, 219 n.1 = ST 166 §241, 174 n.4 and Psychological types (London 1923) 242-57 with 244 n.5. Buddhas and Bodhisattvas: NZ i 13, 97, 264. It will be noted that, for Jung, the boundary between prophet and saviour was completely porous (TE 169 §260, ACU 157 §267, JL ii 174 = E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 102-3). " For the standard view that by "1919, Jung had gone through his major period of psychological distress", see e.g. A.C. Elms, Uncovering lives (New York 1994) 68; P. Homans, Jung in 686 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY context (2 ed., Chicago 1995) 80 ("by August 1914 Jung had entered the most conflicted phase of his critical years, which terminated only toward the end of the decade"); MDR 197 -- 8/206 -- 7. Discussions with his soul: BB vii 92 sheet "cs RB 211 (5 January 1922). For the narrative of Jung's uniquely sound sleep see Aniela Jaffé, From the life and work of C.G. Jung (2" ed., Einsiedeln 1989) 121-2; for his shame at having to induce sleep artificially (ibid. 121), which has more than a little to do with his lingering fears of becoming a second Nietzsche, see his own comments at NZ ii 1470-1. Most of Jung's original work on the material that emerged in the Red book was done at night (RB 223a, 238b with n.91; L.S. Owens, The Gnostic 3, July 2010, 23-36), and sleeplessness recurs as a constant issue throughout the Red Sook itself (RB 237 n.81, 262a, 264b, 296, 306a). Only to people close to him such as Victor White or, ironically, Aniela Jaffé did he say a word about the "severe" insomnia that haunted him again with a vengeance while in the process of writing Aion and Answer to Job (JL i 480, 492 = JW 103, 118; JZ ii 18; cf. ibid. 125, JK 203). During the 1930s he also makes some interesting observations about the archetypes never sleeping, about the sleeplessness that inevitably derives from any human contact with them, and about the futility of trying to turn back the clock for the sake of a good night's sleep by pretending such contact never happened (VZ i 283-5). " Draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 26 January 1924 and documenting the conversation that took place between them on Monday the 21st: RB 213b (CBA; this passage is absurdly misunderstood by Liz Greene in her astrological ramblings, The astrological world of Jung's 'Liber novus, London 2018, 95). I have made some very minor corrections to Shamdasani's transcript, based on comparison with the original manuscript. NOTES TO PAGES 305-308 687 73 The most meaningful introductions to Mani and Manichaeism are still, in spite of their age, Le Manichéisme: son fondateur, sa doctrine (Paris 1949) by Henry Corbin's friend Henri -- Charles Puech as well as the extraordinary paper on "The concept of redemption in Manichaeism" which Puech presented at Eranos during the summer of 1936 (The mystic vision, ed. J. Campbell, Princeton 1968, 247-314); Mani and Manichaeism by Geo Widengren (London 1965); and Mani, by L,J.R. Ort (Leiden 1967). For Mani, his relationship to Empedocles, and the whole question of science as salvation, see also ENM 342-4, 386-7. On Jung's vital appreciation for Mani and the work he inspired -- which he freely describes as "most important", "marvellous", "most gorgeous' -- cf. e.g. JV i 461, 11 659-60, 840, 1004-5, 1028, NZ i 45, 305-8, 492-3, 668, ii 852-3, 1086-7, 1116, 1526. The English text of Mysterium coniunctionis contains a very unfortunate mistranslation: far from stating as his own assessment that "Mani concocted his pernicious heresy which poisoned the nations" (MC 38 §31) Jung is simply reporting the fact that, "according to Christian tradition, Mani is said to have concocted his pernicious heresy with which he poisoned the nations." Of course lingering behind all these details lies one endlessly delicate question. That's the question of the extent to which in spite of his ardent denials, and especially through his constant assault on the doctrine of evil as privatio boni or simple absence of the good which had been shaped by orthodox Christians for the sake of combatting Manichaean dualism, Jung considered it his role to help bring an updated form of Manichaean heresy back into the modern world (cf. e.g. Aion 61 n.74; L. Oglesby, C.G. Jung and Hans Urs von Balthasar, Hove 2014, 85 -- 6, 110-11). 74'The master who transcends the universe: draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 28 January 1924 (CBA). For 688 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY Jung's instinctive horror at the tendency to "concretize" (cf. JL ii 203) the infinitely subtle quintessence of the saviour in the form of a single human being rather than allowing the saving principle to operate freely, beyond and contrary to all our reasonable expectations, see e.g. RB 311b, PT 260-2 §§438 -- 43, ACU 157-8 §267. On the cage in which Master and disciple so easily trap each other cf. RB 316b; TE 234 §390. For the biblical pillar of fire which guides through the night, as opposed to the pillar of cloud that guides in the daytime, see Exodus 13:21 -- 2, 14:24, Numbers 14:14, Nehemiah 9:12 and 19. On the pillar of fire or light as a specifically Manichaean -- and, later, Sufi -- symbol cf. e.g. C. Schmidt and HJ. Polotsky, Ein Mani-Fund in Agypten (Berlin 1933) 66 with S.N.C. Lieu, Manichaeism in the later Roman Empire and medieval China (2TM ed., Tiibingen 1992) 139; H. Corbin, Cyclical time and Ismaili gnosis (London 1983) 109-15, 140-1, 181 with G. Bowering, The mystical vision of existence in classical Islam (Berlin 1980) 149-54; F. Kazemi in Lights of 'Irfan, ed. I. Ayman, xiv (Darmstadt 2013) 60-6. For the prophet as a pillar see also W. Bousset, Hauptprobleme der Gnosis (Gottingen 1907) 173 (cf. 193 with AN vii 142) and, on the broader historical context, C. -- M. Edsman, Le baptéme de feu (Uppsala 1940) 154-74 (especially 166-72 for both Christ and Mani as pillars of fire); M. Idel, Ascensions on high in Jewish mysticism (Budapest 2005) 123-7; M. Popovic, Reading the human body (Leiden 2007) 248-9. Jung himself was intimately familiar with the various roles played by the pillar of fire or light in Manichaean tradition: JV ii 1004-5; NZ ii 853; MC 76 n.219, 395 §567. For his own observations on its psychological meaning see also [/P 147, 154; NZ ii 1420; PPT 220 n.17; AS 62, 310 with n.20. ® NZ ii 852. Jung is primarily talking here about the archetypal "distortion" that was caused as soon as Nietzsche NOTES TO PAGES 308-312 689 started identifying with Zarathustra; but the very same principle applies in the case of Zarathustra or any other prophets identifying with their own prophetic role. Compare PR 345-6 §534, where Jung describes the infinite blessings that spontaneously arise as a result of "the archetypes awaking to independent life"; and note also his advice to Barbara Robb ("I hope she won't be tempted to identify herself with that greater personality owing to which she knows myself") at JW 71, where the point is that any identification would simply interfere with the ability of this greater being to do its mysterious work around the world in conformity "to the divine will" (ibid. 70-6). On the other hand, as a vivid example of the devil's face that appears when someone personally identifies with the archetype of the saviour see JK 259-60, 261-2. 76 Jung on doubt: RB 301b; C. MacKenna in Insanity and divinity, ed. J. Gale, M. Robson and G. Rapsomatioti (Hove 2014) 68; and on "the importance of doubting our doubt" compare APMM 13. For Corbin and the Ishraqi tradition see e.g. AE xvi; on Ishragi mysticism and the Presocratics, APMM 371-91. 77 On the inevitable "corruption" caused by the misunder- standings -- and misunderstandings of misunderstandings -- of apostles, followers and disciples see W.B. Henning, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 2 (1944) 136-7 = Selected papers (Tehran 1977) ii 142-3. For Mani's innovation of both painting and writing see e.g. L.J.R. Ort, Mani (Leiden 1967) 106-17 plus, on the whole question of Manichaean art, A. von Le Coq, Die buddhistische Spatantike in Mittelasien ii (Die manichaischen Miniaturen, Berlin 1923) and v (Neue Bildwerke, Berlin 1926); H.-J. Klimkeit, Manichdische Kunst an der Seidenstrasse (Opladen 1996); Z. Gulacsi, Mani's pictures (Leiden 2015), 690 THREE *' THE SUNSET WAY and note also Henry Corbin's comments, L'homme de lumieére dans le soufisme iranien (Paris 1971) 194-201 = The man of light in Iranian Sufism (Boulder 1978) 133-8. For the dynamic in Manichaeism of essential continuity with, as well as superiority to and divergence from, one's prophetic predecessors see Ort 115-27. For the crucial emphasis on one's own source of inspiration being identical to the source that inspired every single predecessor, compare Henning's formal summary of "Manichaean prophetology" (in Mani's particular case "the object of the divine inspirations he had received was to make known the true state of the world to mankind" but the essence "of all revelations, whether received by Mani or by his predecessors, was the same: they emanated from the same source and were given for the same purpose"; Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 2, 1944, 136 = Selected papers ii 142) as well as Ort 118: "when we listen carefully to his words, we do not hear the voice of a syncretist. Mani only wants to say that his forerunners and he were sent and inspired by the same sender. This means that Buddha, Zarathustra and Jesus received their inspiration from the very same source as Mani did ... Instead of syncretism we should call this phenomenon 'common source' or 'same inspiration". On the standard Gnostic and Manichaean as well as Islamic procedure of listing prophetic predecessors by name, with a notable fondness for the number four, see e.g. H. Jonas, Gnosis und spatantiker Geist i (3" ed., Gottingen 1964) 285 n.1; E. Rose, Die manichaische Christologie (Wiesbaden 1979) 33; C. Colpe, Das Siegel der Propheten (Berlin 1990) 228-9; J.C. Reeves, Heralds of that good realm (Leiden 1996). Jung's addition of Muhammad to the list of prophets is simply an acknowledgement of the well-known fact that Muhammad succeeded Mani as the next major figure in history to become the "Seal of Prophets", and took over many Manichaean traditions in the process: see e.g. Colpe 227-47; NOTES TO PAGES 312~314 691 M. Frenschkowski, Offenbarung und Epiphanie i (Tubingen 1995) 208-9. 78 MDRC 224-30; MDR 228-32/242-6; cf. JP 31-4 (8 November 1957). Note that at DR 228/242, where Jung is describing his arrangements for sailing back to Europe, "from Marseilles" should read "for Marseilles". Although a reference to the Uigurian script and Turfan Manichaean fragments is missing in the unpublished Protocols, there is no way that Aniela Jaffé would have invented such details; and of course in such a case she had access not only to various kinds of additional written material (cf. e.g. her From the life and work of C.G. Jung, 2 ed., Einsiedeln 1989, 134; JSB 25) but to Jung himself. The omission of the reference in his own 1957 rendering is significant as an indicator of how, on a certain conscious or unconscious level, Jung came to review and even revise the meaning of his older dreams. 79 Sad to say, Sonu Shamdasani prefaces the first-ever publication of this potent dialogue by forcefully insisting that Jung's role as a psychologist demanded the outright "rejection" of anything relating to religion which his anima or soul might suggest to him (RB 211-12). But such an idea of "rejection" involves the most fundamental misunderstanding, and distortion, of Jungian psychology -- and guarantees an instant return to that "rational standpoint" which, Jung himself warns, will always find ways to dismiss the soul's promptings as worthless (PT 251-2 §426). This particular dialogue between him and his soul is of course a classic example of the inner dialogue between conscious and unconscious which aims at producing what he came to call the transcendent function; and the transcendent function involves no rejection of anything at all, except on the surface. Underneath the warring of 692 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY opposites, it's nothing but a matter of constant refinement and collaboration working towards the mystery of integration on a deeper level (SD 87-90 §§181-9). This is why Jung liked to cite the tempting of Christ in the desert as a perfect instance of the transcendent function at work: on the surface it could seem that Christ is simply rejecting the devil's attempts to seduce him with power. But ultimately he is rejecting nothing because, thanks to the devil, he is brought straight to the realization of his spiritual or invisible power (JL i 267-8, cf. PT' 53 §80). As for the popular idea nowadays that Jung couldn't wait to reject the cunning and seductive suggestions of his soul, it can be helpful to consider how attentive and respectful he was towards her prophecies about his own destiny (JP 258). The fact is that his quotation in Psychological types of Spitteler's words to the soul contains, like the opening to the Red book, more than a touch of the autobiographical: "And though I be stripped of all, yet am I rich beyond all measure so long as you alone remain with me, and name me 'my friend' with your sweet mouth" (cf. PT 174 §290). 80 "Secret church": Jung to Esther Harding on 5 July 1922, Quadrant 8/2 (Winter 1975) 9 ("He said that if we belong to the secret church, then we belong, and we need not worry about it, but can go our own way") = JS 29; L.S. Owens in Das 'Rote Buch', ed. T. Arzt (Wurzburg 2015) 250, 252. "Invisible church": CS 19-20, RB 211 n.176; it will be noted that the idea of an "invisible church" has closer ties with orthodox Christianity than the notion of a "secret church" (cf. e.g. A. Gamman, Church invisible, Whangaparaoa 2013). Later Jung would also often refer to the ecclesia spiritualis or "spiritual church", in harmony with the traditions deriving from Joachim of Fiore, and encounter significant resistance for doing so (L. Oglesby, C.G. Jung and Hans Urs von Balthasar, NOTES TO PAGES 314-318 693 Hove 2014, 73; for the history of the idea see e.g. M. Reeves, The influence of prophecy in the later Middle Ages, Oxford 1969, 203, 272). Richard Noll usefully cites Harold McCormick's formal description in 1916 of the Psychological Club as "the Visible Church", by way of contrast with the invisible church he calls the "School of Zurich" -- but gratuitously adds that "Harold's reference to the club as the 'Visible Church' reveals that he had been reading the works of Arthur Edward Waite, particularly his 1909 book The Hidden Church of the Holy Grail" (The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 229). Clearly all it reveals is that McCormick, no less than Esther Harding and others, has been listening to Jung. For Waite's research into the mystical path "which, according to western traditions centred on the Holy Grail, has been called the path of the 'Secret Church' in the sense of the church that lies hidden inside the 'secret' of every human soul", see Henry Corbin's comments: Temple et contemplation (2 ed., Paris 2006) 315, 456. 81 Right at the start of the Red book: RBu 229b (folio i verso; RB 229b). Jung's opening announcement here about what he needs to proclaim ("euch verktinden") is just as unmistakably biblical as his statement, a little later on the same folio page, about being overpowered by divine grace. The single passage he is echoing most closely and most obviously is John 16:13-15 ("was zukiinfftig ist wirt er euch verktinden ... euch verkiinden ... euch verktinden" in the Ziircher Bibel), which is no accident at all considering that he has already started the Red book by inserting a quotation from the Gospel of John alongside his three quotations from Isaiah (folio i recto, RB 229a). But the language at Isaiah 61:1 of proclaiming ("verktinden") the prophetic message ("Botschaft") is equally relevant in light of the importance that, even many years later, Jung will continue ascribing to his own prophetic message or "Botschaft" to the 694 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY world (JP 144); see also Exodus 19:3, John 4:19-26, Acts of the Apostles 26:22 -- 24. For his explicit introductory statements about being forced to speak on behalf of the spirit of the depths and being given the divine grace or "Gnade" which is needed for him not to resist, see Red book folio i verso (RB 230b) and compare e.g. Isaiah 6:5-8. The spirit of the depths takes everything away from him including his attachment to science, robs him of joy and life and the ability to speak about anything else: RB 229-30; cf. V.W. Odajnyk, PP 53 (2010) 447-8. Having no choice: RB 229-30; JP 145 (softened for the published biography: MDRC 122, MDR 171/178). "Glad to have escaped from death": Homer, Odyssey 9.63, 9.566, 10.134; ZL 23 §69; JP 147, MDRC 120 with n.1 = ETG 180 with n.4, Keeping Odysseus, or Ulysses, in mind: RB 245b, 246 n.159, 247b with n.176, 304 n.223, 366a, 367a; NZ i 462 with n.3, 111191 with n.2; ETG 103 -- 4. When Jung told Aniela Jafté during October 1957 that by writing the Red book he had been obeying exactly and faithfully ("getreu") the divine obligation imposed on him, he was referring straight back to Elijah's command -- over forty years earlier -- to write down exactly and faithfully ("getreu") whatever he had been shown: RB 252b, JP 148 (cf. 144-5 and also RB 190, written in 1959). His disappointed hope of being freed: JP 148. The part of him that couldn't stand the grand prophetic style, the overpowering language of "Prophetentum": JP 144 -- 5, 169; Jaffé has caused no end of harm, and dragged down any number of Jungian commentators in the process, by removing what Jung had said about prophetic language and replacing it with her pretty nonsense about him abandoning the Red book because he felt it was too "aesthetic" (WDR 180-1/188). For Jung's awareness of the need to translate the "Botschaft", the message or mission to the world which had forcibly been imposed on him, into NOTES TO PAGES 318-321 695 another language which is the language of science see his crystal-clear statement at JP 144. 82 Parmenides and Empedocles on the need to re-adapt to human conventions, and to the acceptable language of science in their time: Parmenides frs. 1.28-32, 8.50-2 and 60-1 Diels = frs. 8A.35 -- 7 and 8B, 14B.76-8 and 15C.11-12 Gemelli Marciano; Empedocles frs. 4, 8 and 9 Diels = frs. 9, 13 and 14 Gemelli Marciano; ENM 382-4; Reality 27, 205-58, 422-9. Jung on returning to the "human side", and science: RB 219b, cf. JP 148; it should be remembered how acutely conscious Jung was, not least through his intimate familiarity with ancient Greek and Latin literature, of the huge difficulties involved in returning to the world of the living from the world of the dead (P4 39; S. Shamdasani, C.G. Jung: a biography in books, New York 2012, 201-2). The divinity and the perils of meétis: M. Detienne and J.-P. Vernant, Les ruses de l'intelligence (Paris 1974); and for the crucial role of métis in the life as well as the teachings of both Parmenides and Empedocles see Reality. The divine takes care of everything: IDPW, Reality 26-284. Hopefully there is no need to give references for Odysseus' famous return at the end of the Homeric Odyssey. With manifest scorn, as if even to mention such absurd notions is already to discredit them, Sonu Shamdasani refers to the work of Paul Stern -- "In his view, Jung was a 'seer' disguised as a scientist" -- and not only notes that Frank McLynn similarly "regarded Jung as a prophet masquerading as a scientist" but also cites McLynn's hilarious comment about how "acres of print could have been saved if Jung had come clean and admitted that he was a prophet" (PJ. Stern, C.G. Jung: the haunted prophet, New York 1976; F. McLynn, Carl Gustav Jung, New York 1996, 316; JSB 72, 83). For descriptions of Jungian 696 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY psychology as simply Gnosticism or Theosophy in disguise see already H. Ellenberger, L'évolution psychiatrigue 17 (1952) 151. Jung bluntly states that the task imposed on him was to translate his mission and message to the world out from the language of prophecy into the language of science: JP 144 (September 1957); cf. 145, 169. "Today the voice of one crying ... SM 38 §55 (1934), citing Isaiah 40:3; cf. ZZ 35 §108. On the futility of appearing openly as a prophet in the modern world see JL ii 174 = E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 102-3 (1954); and note, as well, Rolfe's later comment to Jung that in this age "of spiritual collapse without a parallel in human history" nobody believes what mystics or medicine men or saviours say "because they lack a scientific foundation, and the Scientist is the Medicine Man of the modern age" (ibid. 163-4: for scientists as modern prophets in fact and deed, compare Lynda Walsh's recent study Scientists as prophets, New York 2013). Of course this brings Jung himself breathtakingly close to what he describes as the "attempts at concealment" by people like Rudolf Steiner or Mary Baker Eddy, whose movements "have a genuinely religious character even when they pretend to be scientific"; but that simply helps to explain why he was so conscious of the need to emphasize his scientific credentials. And besides, as he goes straight on to add: the fact that all these movements "give themselves a scientific veneer is not just a grotesque caricature or a masquerade, but a positive sign that they are actually pursuing 'science', i.e., Anowledge, instead of faith, which ... modern man abhors ... He wants to Anow -- to experience for himself" (CT 84 §§170 -- 1). For the situation of the mystic putting on the garment of science see also P. Kingsley, Black zinnias 1 (2003-4) 21-6. ®5 Worth mentioning twice: Empedocles fr. 25 Diels; cf. fr. 35.1-3 Diels = fr. 38.1-3 Gemelli Marciano with ENM 395-6. NOTES TO PAGES 321-325 697 1* October 1957: JP 149. With Jung's contrast between fiery lava and the ordered rigidity of his published books compare Cary de Angulo's contrast, over thirty years earlier, between the fire that burns through his spoken words as well as through the written words of the Red book and the "doctoring" of his published books so as to make them come from the head rather than the heart (RB 214a; CBA). For Aniela Jaffé's misunderstandings and distortions of this particular passage in the Protocols, including her replacement of Jung's cosmological image of transforming the oozing primordial substance "into an orderly world" with the trivial idea of him wanting to incorporate it "into the contemporary picture of the world", see MDRC 145, ETG 203, MDR 190/199; for Sonu Shamdasani's, JM 22 ("... and then had to classify everything ..."). "The ordinary language ... before man had the thought": NZ ii 970-1. As a mythological example of "the revelation of the thought that existed before man had the thought" Jung cites the Babylonian fish-god Oannes, who delivers his primordial wisdom to humanity from the sea of the unconscious (ibid. 971). This is no accident, because elsewhere Jung describes a dream he had in which Oannes was identical to his own teacher Philemon (letter to Cary de Angulo dated 17 August 1925: CBA) -- and the discovery that not even one's thoughts are one's own was, of course, Philemon's greatest gift to Jung. See JP 24; MDR 176/183; and note also TE 201 §323 on the danger of falling so deeply into "the habit of identifying ourselves with the thoughts that come to us that we invariably assume we have made them'. *4 Empedocles fr. 9.5 Diels = fr. 14.5 -- 6 Gemelli Marciano; ENM 382-4 with n.120; Reality 422-5; Gemelli Marciano, Die Vorsokratiker ii (2TM ed., Berlin 2013) 374-5. 698 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY 85 "I'm the damnedest dilettante ...": JP 149; the passage has already been showcased, with the most unfortunate results, at JM 22. Aside from his grotesque mistranslation of the words "der hat dann alles angeordnet" as meaning that Jung himself "then had to classify everything", Sonu Shamdasani lurches from disaster to disaster by also mistranslating "ich bin der verfluchteste Dilettant" as "I am the most cursed dilettante' -- and using this image of a cursed but noble dilettante as the basis for an entire book about how Jung the struggling scientist made it his life's goal to unite all the scientific disciplines of his time under a single, psychological banner (JM 1, 22), But Jung is simply swearing here ("I'm the damnedest dilettante who ever lived"), as he often did; and although he sometimes talked elsewhere about the value of trying "to counter the fragmentation of the sciences" (ibid. 22), anyone caring to continue reading this particular passage in the unpublished Protocols will soon realize that his real meaning and the true focus of his interest lay somewhere else entirely. Unfortunately, the almost complete absence of discrimination being demonstrated in such matters by the Jungian community means that all these misunderstandings are already percolating into the literature about Jung (so e.g. J.R. Haule, Jung in the 21" century, Hove 2011, i 2, 258, 262 n.6); and while Shamdasani has made a crusade out of denouncing the fanciful "myth-making" (JM 1-2, 24, etc.) enveloping the figure of Jung, it seems to have escaped him that to over-rationalize Jung's words and work is just another form of myth-making. The one point where Shamdasani is at least close to correct about Jung's confession here to being a dilettante is when he notes how it was excluded by Aniela Jaffé from the published version of Jung's biography, and how "it is not surprising that it was omitted, being so far away from prevalent images of Jung" (ibid. 22). In fact Jaffé's surviving NOTES TO PAGE 327 699 typescript of the Protocols still shows how desperate she was, at the point where Jung opens up quite honestly about his dilettantism, to insert into the text a handwritten addition of her own praising him for the unquestioned excellence and exactness of his science (JP 149). This is the same story which has just repeated itself all over again with the recent editors of a collection of his letters: at the point where Jung describes both himself and the person he is writing to as "mere dilettantes", "bloge Dilettanten", his editors are quick to insist that the word "dilettante" is here being used by him "in a nonpejorative sense" (QPT 40 with n.44; the fact that Jung goes on to refer to both himself and his correspondent as amateurs, in the literal sense of lovers, changes nothing). For Jung as dilettante compare also Sonja Marjasch's portrayal of him as "like a magpie, picking everything up and taking it home" (D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 826 n.102); his own confession, in 1957, to being "utterly amathematikos" (JL ii 404, cf. SD 419 §816); his descriptions of himself as a dilettante at JZ i 114 and MDR 91/86; and the strikingly lifeless foreword he wrote for a projected American Eranos volume which, it just so happens, was never published (Spring 92, 2015, 83). It's more than a little ironic that Shamdasani should make the mistake of using this uniquely superficial foreword, with its hollow-sounding call for specialists from various fields to bring their talents together at Eranos, to try and throw light on Jung's uniquely profound explanation of his dilettantism here in the Protocols (JM 21-2): forcing the exoteric to explain the esoteric is never a good idea. As it happens, Cary Baynes was not only intelligent but courageous enough to tell Jung that the foreword he had written was so pathetically feeble it didn't deserve printing. He wholeheartedly agreed, but refused to rewrite it as she was urging. He had only written the piece to get the organizer of the Eranos gatherings, Olga Frobe -- Kapteyn, off his back and 700 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY wasnt going to waste any more of his precious time or effort on something he considered so unimportant (Bair 472; R. Bernardini, Jung a Eranos, Milan 2011, 296-7). 86 JP 149. In the original, the fundamental contrast is plain and clear between the "Urstoff" or "primordial material" of the unconscious -- what he also refers to as the "raw material" or "Rohstoff" which is the spontaneously flowing substance of prophecy (JP 169) -- and the "Bekleidungsstoff" or cloaking material that he uses to cover and hide it. Due to obvious legal restrictions, and also out of respect for the unpublished nature of the material, I have limited myself to faithfully paraphrasing rather than translating what Jung says in this crucial passage. Anything more will have to wait until the Protocols of his interviews with Aniela Jaffé are published and officially mistranslated. *" For Jung's straightforward and unqualified statement that the alchemists' experiences were his own experiences see JP 227 (22 November 1957; dismembered, as well as watered down, in MDR 196/205, 200/209). For his complaining, evidently to Marie -- Louise von Franz, about the ordeal imposed on him by his researches into alchemy cf. A. Ribi, Analytische Psychologie 13 (1982) 202 ("Er soll gesagt haben, diese Arbeit habe ihn noch viel mehr Miihe gekostet als die Auseinandersetzung mit dem Unbewussten"). Regarding the psychological significance implicit, for Jung, in such imagery of clothing and unclothing see F.X. Charet, Spiritualism and the foundations of C.G. Jung's psychology (Albany 1993) 253. On alchemical tradition as itself prophetic, note for example the magical hymn to Hermes as thnétoist prophéta or "prophet to mortals" with which Jung introduces his major study on "The spirit Mercurius" (4S 192), and compare the statement he quotes, in his last major work, NOTES TO PAGES 327-330 701 from Nicholas Barnaud about "the entire Law and Prophecy of alchemy" (tota Lex et Prophetia chemica: MC 61 §59 with 566 n.140. To understand what lies behind this combination of "Law and Prophecy" see e.g. P. Lory, Jabir ibn Hayyan, L Elaboration de I' élixir supréme, Damascus 1988, 15 with n.33 and IDPW 204-19). For alchemy as a prophetic tradition right from the start see, in general, R. Reitzenstein, Poimandres (Leipzig 1904), especially 215 n. ("Der vollkommene Alchemist hat die gnésis und ist der wahre Prophet"); S.L. Grimes, Zosimus of Panopolis (PhD thesis, Syracuse University 2006) 37 with n.64, 38, 42; K.A. Fraser, Dionysius 25 (2007) 37, 47-9; M. Martelli, Numncius 26 (2011) 289-90; R. Patai, The Jewish alchemists (Princeton 1994) 18, 21, 29-30, 49, 70; Lory 15; L. DeVun, Prophecy, alchemy and the end of time (New York 2009). And for the later expression "alchemy is the sister of prophecy" compare SB xi, 205-6, 301 n.72, 324 nn.54 -- 5. *§ For the very respectable idea that Jung finally managed to "find his true life's work" in the world of science by slamming the door. shut on the world of prophecy see e.g. Joseph Cambray, IJ/S 3 (2011) 110-24. When I happened to meet one of the leading authorities on Jung's relationship to science during February 2016, I asked why he never mentioned how profoundly ambiguous Jung was about science throughout his life and how eager he had been in practice to keep "turning a blind eye to scientific knowledge" (CT'251 §496). The answer I was given is quite indicative of how much attention one should be paying to a lot of the Jungian literature on the subject being published nowadays: "Of course I'm aware of what you are referring to but I am not able to mention it when I speak or teach or write because, if I did, ''d immediately lose my funding and no one would invite me to speak at conferences any more." As for the idea, more popular now than 702 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY ever since the Red book has been published, that Jung simply abandoned the world of prophecy for the world of science: this is mostly presented as a sophisticated modern account of his intellectual evolution and development. What seems to have gone unnoticed is that it's just a tired reproduction of all the schizophrenic attempts already made for almost two centuries by rationalistic historians to dispose of the unbearable tensions, the intolerable conflicts and contradictions, between the figure of Empedocles the scientist and the reality of Empedocles the prophet. Supposedly everything could be solved by arguing that Empedocles played the role of irrational prophet while he was still a hot-headed youth only to abandon such utter nonsense, later, for the sober life of a scientist (so e.g. J. Bidez, La biographie d'Empédocle, Ghent 1894, 159-74, W. Kranz, Hermes 70, 1935, 111-119); it has taken the better part of two hundred years to discredit such childish ideas once and for all by proving that Empedocles the prophet was also a scientist while Empedocles the scientist, doctor, philosopher, never stopped inwardly being a prophet (A. Martin and O. Primavesi, L'Empédocle de Strasbourg, Berlin 1999, 114-19; ENM 339-41). As for Jung's own early days of initially wanting to achieve something through science before, in 1913, he ended up bumping into the fateful stream of lava (JP 149): he had thrown himself into the world of science as fully as he could (MDR 79-92/72-86; E. Taylor, Psychoanalytic review 83, 1996, 547-68) even though he was already filled with horror at the cold, robotic heartlessness of most science as well as most scientists (see e.g. M -- L. von Franz, ZZ xvi -- xviii for 1896 and 1897; A. Jaffé, Word and image, Princeton 1979, 26-7 for his diary entries in 1898). The lava then takes away his belief in science: RB 229b (cf. 336b with n.18). And as for his later dilettantism: one of the more obvious examples is the saga of P'W. Martin's attempts, initially under the aegis of UNESCO, to NOTES TO PAGE 330 703 establish a solid scientific basis for the study of individuation. Jung began by offering the most ambiguous as well as half- hearted assistance and, after years of expensive funding from the Bollingen Foundation, Martin's projects effectively came to nothing (SZ 606-13; JZ ii 219; W. McGuire, Bollingen, Princeton 1982, 136-7; P. Pietikainen, Alchemists of human nature, London 2007, 125~6). Or there is the earlier case of his involvement with the journal called Weltanschauung, which very ambitiously aimed "to bring about a synthesis of the sciences"; but rather than describing in glowing terms how the scale of this project "indicates the enormous scope of Jung's undertaking" and "provides a good illustration of his encyclopedic conception of psychology", it would be better simply to note that "the project came to nothing" (JM 19-21). As for the immensely successful Eranos conferences, on the other hand: rather than suggesting Jung was the guiding force behind them (ibid. 21 -- 2) it would be far more accurate to explain that the real guiding force and inspiration was Olga Frébe -- Kapteyn, who not only struggled constantly with Jung's influence but most often experienced him as a force that "worked against Eranos" (H.T. Hakl, Eranos, Sheffield 2013, 45, 104-5, 165-6; R. Bernardini, Historia religionum 5, 2013, 98). And with regard to his most famous scientific publication, on synchronicity, it helps to remember how quickly the friends who read what he had written turned into ex-friends as soon as they dared to point out how flawed it was from a scientific point of view; how eventually he had to let the physicist Wolfgang Pauli rewrite the text, before it was ever published, to bring it up to scientific standards; and how Pauli himself later broke off any formal ties with Jung's work because of the utter disregard among Jungians for scientific method or principles (D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 551-4; PB iv/II 75-8, iv/III 536, 620-2, 627-30, 647, 710-11, iv/IV 254, 317, 420-1). 704 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY 89 "To strip off the fantasy ... simply 'meaningful coincidences": M. Fordham's preface to C.G. Jung, Synchronicity (Princeton 1973). For the idea of synchronicity viewed as a very welcome exit from the "world of non-rational Divine power and magic" compare G. Bright's comments, JAP 59 (2014) 287; M. Stein, The red book: a global seminar (Asheville Jung Center DVD: Asheville 2010) 1:16:29-1:18:40. In fact Jung's collaborator Wolfgang Pauli was far better positioned to understand the real factors involved when, on the contrary, he described their collaboration as meant to provoke a head-on "collision" ("Zusammenprall") between the "magical -- alchemical attitude" and the attitude of modern science (Wolfgang Pauli und C.G. Jung: ein Briefwechsel, ed. C.A. Meier, Berlin 1992, 37; D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 553). On the intimate links between synchronicity and the magical doctrine of sympatheia see SD 489-503 §§924 -- 44 (cf. JL ii 45, 82, 175, 409), especially Jung's quaint but very ironic account of synchronicity itself as "an archaic assumption that ought at all costs to be avoided" (SD 502 §944); PB iv/I 186, 319, iv/II 363, 745; AWA 303 n.27. Regarding sympatheia and the magic-based teachings of Empedocles see APMM 296-300, 335-41: it's no coincidence that the one magical technique which Philemon mentions by name to Jung in the Red book is, precisely, this technique of sympathies or sympathetic magic (RB 140, 312b). For a particularly helpful perspective on the ancient view of synchronicities as indicating not only miraculous intervention but also "divine responsibility", and on their very close association with both prophecy and dreams, see D. Wardle, Cicero: on divination, book 1 (Oxford 2006) 227-8, 287-8, 296; for Jung's own association of synchronicity with miracles, R. Main, The rupture of time (Hove 2004) 146. On his firm intention to make sure that his synchronicity theory "shakes NOTES TO PAGE 331 705 the security of our scientific foundations" as precisely the goal he was aiming at, see JL ii 217; and compare his statement, two years later to Wolfgang Pauli, about "the infinitesimal psychological factors which, overlooked by everybody, shake the foundations of our world" (PB iv/IV 514; S. Gieser, The innermost kernel, Berlin 2005, 328). Synchronicity as the "rupture of time": Jung in Combat (9 October 1952) 7 = JS 230; Main 181-3. For synchronicities as "border" phenomena see SD 487 §921; M.-L. von Franz, C.G. Jung: his myth in our time (New York 1975) 239; Bair 553. On Jung's instinctive impatience with any theorizing about synchronicity that failed to return to "die Erfahrung der Fiille des Seins", the immediate experience of the fullness of being, see G. Quispel in The rediscovery of Gnosticism, ed. B. Layton, i (Leiden 1980) 26; for Quispel's explicit equation here of fullness with the Gnostic pléréma see Jung himself, RB 347 with n.82. Compare also A. Ribi's important comments (Analytische Psychologie 13, 1982, 219) on synchronicity, for Jung, as both first and last a matter of experience; and note JM 265-6 on Jung's highly unscientific disdain, even at Eranos, for "possibilities of interdisciplinary research" because of his exclusive concern with the primacy of direct experience. On his "theory" of synchronicity as essentially a matter of redirecting people to the reality of the numinous cf. Main 131-46; for his own presentation of it as an attempt to reintroduce the "ensouling" of matter into the soulless world of science, see e.g. Pauli und Jung: ein Briefwechsel 100 = Atom and archetype, ed. Meier (London 2001) 98; and on his "concern for the depersonalizing effects of excessive rationalization and the resulting mass-mindedness in society as 'the reason and the motive" for him publishing anything at all on the subject of synchronicity, JZ ii 216 with Main, [//S 3 (2011) 147. 706 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY 9 Aside from JP 149, the word "Uroffenbarung" also occurs with a neatly double sense at ETG 24 (cf. MDR 31/17): the dream Jung is referring to is primordial not only because of its strikingly pagan and pre-Christian content but also because it's the earliest dream he remembers having, a dream more ancient and therefore more prophetic (CD 1, JM 157) than any other. His markings in the copy he owned of Wilhelm Bousset's Hauptprobleme der Gnosis (Gottingen 1907, 273-6) prove that Jung was familiar with the language of "Uroffenbarung" as applied, very specifically, to ancient Gnostic and Manichaean traditions; see now also E. Rose, Die manichaische Christologie (Wiesbaden 1979) 42 ("Botschaft ... Uroffenbarung ... Propheten der Wahrheit" in connection with the lineage of Zarathustra, Buddha, Christ and Mani) and e.g. G. Quispel, Gnostica, Judaica, Catholica (Leiden 2008) 33. It should be mentioned that these pencilled markings in Bousset's work date back to the time when Jung first read and studied the book soon after buying it (the list of comments about it which made their way into his alchemy notebooks at AN vii 134 -- 47 dates from much later): compare the very similar annotations in his copy of Richard Reitzenstein's Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen (Leipzig 1910) 18-20 where Reitzenstein is discussing at length the words "Uroffenbarung ... Botschaft ... Prophet" and where, among his other markings, Jung highlights Reitzenstein's memorable assertion that "revelation sets free" ("Offenbarung macht frei"). For the history and meaning of this word "Uroffenbarung" see e.g. F}W.J. von Schelling, Sammtliche Werke i/2 (Stuttgart 1856) 87-92 with W.A. von Schmidt, Zeitschrift fur Religions- und Geistesgeschichte 25 (1973) 43; E. Troeltsch, Kritische Gesamtausgabe ii (Berlin 2007) 575; J.H. Sailhamer, The meaning of the Pentateuch (Downers Grove 2009) 566-9. It also will be noted that the idea of an "Uroffenbarung" came to be closely associated with NOTES TO PAGES 3327-335 707 the work of Friedrich Schleiermacher (Sailhamer 135 -- 45) -- whom Jung, as he confided to Henry Corbin, considered one of his "spiritual ancestors" (HC 328 = AJ 156-7, cf. JZ ii 115). For the essential link between the word "Uroffenbarung" and the world of prophecy see e.g. Sailhamer's comments (196) on "the prophetic notion of primeval revelation'; G.B. Gerlach, Ammon und Schleiermacher (Berlin 1821) 80-2; H.W]. Thiersch, Vorlesungen uber Katholicismus und Protestantismus (Erlangen 1846) ii 9; Bousset, Hauptprobleme 275-6 and Religionsgeschichtliche Studien (Leiden 1979) 95; Reitzenstein 18-20; Christen und Muslime, ed. A. Guthmann et al. (Bielefeld 2010) 2.25. *! The "Uroffenbarung" that Jung couldn't master, and that he had to cloak in science: JP 149 (1 October 1957); the "Botschaft" that overwhelmed him with its power, and that he had to translate into science: ibid. 144 (30 September 1957). For his formal and final statement that he had to give up his work on the Red book to start working on alchemy see RB 190 = 360: his comments here, in 1959, about almost being overpowered and driven mad by the force of his original experiences agree perfectly with what he had said to Aniela Jaffé about the very same situation just a couple of years earlier (JP 149). The dream of the Manichaean book: MDR 228-32/242- -- 6. For some comments on the subtleties of change in ancient prophetic traditions see PJB 41-76; as Jung himself knew very well from his readings in Hermetic literature (cf. e.g. R. Reitzenstein, Poimandres, Leipzig 1904, 214-50), the mystery of rebirth which he so often wrote and talked about was a mystery reserved for prophets. On the need for dissimulation see ACU 144-6 §§253 -- 4; on concealing one's vestiges, Jung's letter to Alice Raphael dated 7 June 1955 (Alice Raphael papers, Beinecke Library, Yale University). The 708 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY conversation with his soul: BB v 79-80; cf. RBu 334b with n.18 (badly translated at RB 336b with n.18). As one example of the dilettantish passion for an evolutionary or "diachronic reading of Jung. The various terms and conceptions as well as shifts to other conceptions can be assigned to particular phases of Jung's scholarly life. The illusion that there is a monolithic psychological theory of Jung's is thoroughly destroyed", see W. Giegerich, Spring 71 (2004) 201. With much more subtlety, Sonu Shamdasani points out that Jung's "theories -- I'm not the first to point out -- are massively inconsistent right throughout. And also they're a makeshift, post 1915-1916. The theories are not the core of Jung's work; they're simply an approximation by which he's attempting to translate his insights into a language for a scientific and medical audience. It's a compromise. Hence the contradictions." But as for what the core is, the best Shamdasani is able to say is that through his science Jung was "trying to construct a new science that redeems or provides new access to the ancient" (JAP 57, 2012, 375). Jung's "many unfinished beginnings': JM 345-7, portraying the Jung Institute in Zurich as one of the more striking examples of his dilettantism. 92 "A path of blood and suffering ... proved to be stronger than all my science": letter written by Jung in 1926 and published by Gerhard Adler, PP 6 (1975) 12; Lionel Corbett's dating of the letter to 1936 is incorrect (The religious function of the psyche, London 1996, 134). For the compensatory role of Jung's own life and writings see SL 704 §1585; JP 383-4; MDR 211/222; A. Jafté, From the life and work of C.G. Jung (2TM ed., Einsiedeln 1989) 140; JM 351. He was of course very aware of the dangers, to him, of overcompensating by identifying exclusively with the unconscious (cf. e.g. 4§ 119-21 §155, on Paracelsus; MC 234-5 §314, an extraordinarily dense passage about apparent hostility NOTES TO PAGES 335-342 709 and defensiveness, on Michael Maier; SZ 704-5 §§1586-8; JP 169-70). "The same compensatory role ... commercial worldliness": C.G. Jung in H.R. Zimmer, Der Weg zum Selbst (Zurich 1944) 22; cf. PR 584 §962. For the compensatory role of prophets compare e.g. SM 98 §153, 122-3 §184, JL ii 4, JN 101-2. Jung's crucial task of helping westerners to remember their own cultural continuity and spiritual past: /P 212-13, 233, ETG 239 = MDR 222/235 (wrongly rendering "Geistesgeschichte" as "intellectual history"). The "lunatic asylum" of collective western rationalism: Aion 181 §282. On the enormous problem of not just material but spiritual acquisitiveness see e.g. RB 231b, 315-16, SM 58 §88, and especially PR 483 §773. With Jung's statement in his letter about submitting to the deliberate practice of suffering because he "wanted God to be alive and free" compare especially his question in the Red book as to whether any suffering could exist which would be too great to want to experience for the sake of God, a question soon followed by his confession that he has submitted to doing deliberate penance for the sake of restoring God to wholeness and health (RB 112): both the question and the confession are sprinkled with references to Isaiah, including chapter 53 which Jung had already quoted right at the start of the Red book (300a with n.204, 300b with n.206). The growing tendency nowadays to dispose of these opening passages from Isaiah with a quick wave of the hand as just some "series of preliminary biblical quotes" before moving straight on to the supposed substance, the real meat, of the Red book (so e.g. J. Cambray, International journal of psychoanalysis 94, 2013, 416) echoes exactly the disastrous tendency of modern critics to ignore Parmenides' crucial "proem" or introduction to his own teaching and rush straight on to the supposed core of what he had to say -- without noticing how the essential clues to understanding everything that comes later 710 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY are already contained in those opening lines (Reality 9-306). As for the correspondences between Jung's letter, written in 1926, and the text of the Red book: they should be enough, by themselves, to dispose once and for all of the claims sometimes made nowadays that the Red book was little more than a literary exercise or some detached and impersonal experiment in ventriloquism. "Truly, he himself has borne ...": Isaiah 53:4; I have translated from the Latin text used by Jung (Red book, folio i recto = RB 229a) while keeping an eye on the Zurcher Bibel version he was also familiar with (cf. MC 123 n.161). As a few wise commentators have already been forced to realize just on the basis of this opening quotation, Jung is identifying himself directly with that being who according to Isaiah "has borne our sicknesses and carried our pains" (V.W. Odajnyk, PP 53, 2010, 441-2; R.J. Woolger, Scientific and medical network review, Summer 2011, 4 -- 5). Presciently, because he didn't have direct access to the Red book, Edward Edinger had also connected the statement made by Jung in his letter about wanting to take God's suffering on himself with Isaiah 53: "I think we could say that that remark comes from the archetype of the Suffering Servant of Yahweh." But although Edinger makes sure to admit that this whole subject is "a mysterious business', "quite astonishing", he is a little too scrupulous about surgically removing what he calls "the archetype of the Suffering Servant" from the context of prophecy and salvation which gives it life (Ego and self; Toronto 2000, 40-6). For an eloquent account of the difference between true prophets or saviours and false ones, see RB 315-17; for prophet as saviour and saviour as prophet cf. e.g. NZ i 12-13, 24 (Saoshyant); on the compensating factor from the unconscious as precisely what we don't expect, PA 44 §48; and on the saviour not as an impossibly "concrete" person (cf. JZ ii 203) but as the saving principle always operating beyond, and contrary to, our NOTES TO PAGES 342-343 711 reasonable expectations see e.g. RB 311b, PT 260-2 §§ 438-43, ACU 157-8 §267. For the Gnostic saviour as embodying the gnosis or true knowledge of life cf. NZ i 569; PR 513-14 §841; and E.S. Drower's classic, as well as irreplaceable, study The secret Adam (Oxford 1960). As for the problems faced by modern rationalists and would-be psychologists when confronting the voluntary suffering of prophets, see e.g. Carolyn Sharp's discussion of Ezekiel in Old Testament prophets for today (Louisville 2009) 80 ("... It is possible that Ezekiel struggles with a dissociative illness or seizure disorder ..."); D,J. Halperin, Seeking Ezekiel (University Park, PA 1993). For the prophetic acceptance of suffering see also R.E. Averbeck's observations in The gospel according to Isaiah 53, ed. D.L. Bock and M. Glaser (Grand Rapids 2012) 40-5, together with Jung's far more tender words on the role of the "true" or genuine prophet at NZ i 496. "° On Jung's need to compensate for humanity's collective rationalism, compare e.g. SL 704 §1585. For the outrage experienced by vengeful nature at "the individual and his rationally ordered world" because of "the violence his reason has done to her", see especially PR 344 §531: the language here is notably close to the language in Jung's letter about God and "the suffering man has put on him by loving his own reason ..... On the role played according to William Blake by reason, or Urizen, in "the agony of Nature herself" see S.F. Damon, A Blake dictionary (2" ed., Hanover, NH 2013) 311; on the "revenge" of Nature in her "howling melancholy", ibid. 429-31; and note also Allen Ginsberg's comments, The Paris review 37 (Spring 1966) 38-9. On "mystical fool" as Jung's formulaic expression for a prophet who is mocked and unacknowledged, see ACU 48 §98. Referring to this passage, John Dourley describes Jung as not only someone who made a 712 THREE !: THE SUNSET WAY point of writing about the mystical fool but "as one himself" -- although his book, titled On behalf of the mystical fool (Hove 2010, esp. vi-vii), would have been far richer if he had noticed the letter where Jung applies the same expression directly to himself. Jung's rationale for using such a phrase to evoke the figure of the unwelcome and unrecognized prophet could, to anyone who knew the Bible as well as he did, hardly be easier to understand. It was simply a matter of echoing the famous words of Hosea 9:7: "The prophet is a fool, the man of the spirit is insane, because of the enormity of your iniquity and the enormity of your hostility." See for this verse T. Jemielity, Satire and the Hebrew prophets (Louisville 1992) 138; also Rivkah Scharf Kluger's comments (Psyche in scripture, Toronto 1995, 37), later repeated by Marie-Louise von Franz (Archetypal dimensions of the psyche, Boston 1997, 12 = Archetypische Dimensionen der Seele, 2" ed., Einsiedeln 2005, 23); compare MC 549 §783; and note Jung's description of himself at MDR 328/356 as a "fool" because no one could perceive or understand his vision, together with D. Tacey's comments, The darkening spirit (Hove 2013) 41. On the forgotten but time- honoured art of evoking and echoing such phrases or images from sacred scripture, which until recently played such a central role in western culture and literature and communication, cf. APMM 42-3. 4 'Trying to finish the Red 500k and complete the last painting: ETG 387 ("... Er konnte oder wollte es jedoch auch jetzt nicht vollenden. Es habe, so sagte er, mit dem Tod zu tun"), RB 221a. The last painting: RB 169. Jung's visions of people who soon would die: MDR 42/30. For the deletion of the original passage by his family because it was too explicit in documenting Jung's prophetic powers, see A.C. Elms, Uncovering lives (New York 1994) 64. The deleted passage can NOTES TO PAGES 343-347 713 still be found and read in the typescript of Memories, dreams, reflections held at the Countway Library of Medicine in Boston (MDRC 23): Jung himself had made a point of emphasizing in it that such visions of faces are nowhere near as insignificant, or innocuous, as most people usually assume them to be. The quest for the impossible: F. McCormick in Car] Gustav Jung, 1875-1961: a memorial meeting (New York 1962) 13. Magically making the impossible possible: PT. 262 §443. 5 'The "unsayable": JP 359-60, reworked for publication as MDR 211/222; D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 597. For the mystical implications, in such a context, of the unspeakable or "unsagbar" see e.g. D. Hell, Soul Aunger (Einsiedeln 2010) 52 with n.2; the language in referring to a completely different reality from ours is, also, not mine but Jung's (JP 359). Mysterium coniunctionis and the transcendent: JP 233, to be read in preference to the dressed-up version at MDR 210-11/221; and, for the transcendent, compare the final pages of the book itself (MC 547-53 §§781-9). For the modern mantra that, far from being a religious person or prophet, Jung was simply a detached psychologist engaged in studying the "religion -- making process" see e.g. S. Shamdasani, JAP 44 (1999) 543 and RB 212a ("religious -- making process', ibid., is presumably a misprint). Jung on his psychology as "a movement of the spirit which took possession of me and which I had to and was allowed to serve all my life": JK 157 (cf. JL ii 104; January 1953). This of course, like pretty much everything else he says about himself during the last ten years of his life, is very different from the contemporary idea of Jung as an independent and freewheeling player never willing for a moment to let the archetypal reality of the unconscious "dictate to him as a servile mortal who must obey or face doom" (M. Stein, JAP 56, 2011, 603). 714 THREE ! THE SUNSET WAY "6 [lIness and the experience of ecstatic mystical union in 1944: MDR 270-7/289-97, the inner reality of the experience remained with him to the end of his life (M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse, London 1966, 60). Unspeakable: MDR 274-5/294-5. For the immediacy of Jung's closeness to death after 1944 see the material gathered by Sonu Shamdasani in Quadrant 38/1 (2008) 21-4, although to describe this natural development as "a critical shift in Jung's perspective on life" (23) is to risk underestimating the extent to which it represented a return to the intense familiarity with death that was already guiding Jung at the time of his work on the Red book (cf. e.g. RB 266-7, 273-5, 323a, 370b; S.L. Drob, Kabbalistic visions, New Orleans 2010, 219). Aion as something he was forced to write: JW 103 = JZ i 480. For the direct connection between it and his experience of deification through becoming the lion-headed god Aion almost forty years earlier, compare the frontispiece of the book with RB 252; [JP 103-8; JPPF 4/1 (1912) 322-3 and ST 108 n.72, 279 n.21, 280-1 §§425-6 plus plate XLIV; SZ 121 §266; CD 63-4, 205, 225, 249; R. Noll, Spring 53 (1994) 12-60; E.F. Edinger, The Aion lectures (Toronto 1996) 17-18, 190-2; L.S. Owens, PP 54 (2011) 281. Similarly, it was the work of writing Aion that would plunge Jung back into the direct presence of his spiritual teacher and father Philemon (JZ i 480-1, 491-2 = JW 103-4, 116-18; Owens 278-9). On Aion as both god and concept see e.g. C. Lackeit, Aion i (Konigsberg 1916); G. Zuntz, Aion, Gott des Rémerreichs (Heidelberg 1989) and Aion in der Literatur der Kaiserzeit (Vienna 1992); G. Casadio in Religion im Wandel der Kosmologien, ed. D. Zeller (Frankfurt 1999) 175-90. "Before my illness ... everything was perfect": M. Ostrowski -- Sachs, From conversations with C.G. Jung (Zurich 1971) 68. For Joachim of Fiore see Jung himself, Aion 82-7 §§137-42, 149-50 §§232-5, 253 §399 with plate II; Joachim's teaching NOTES TO PAGES 350-353 715 of world ages is, very significantly, already present in Jung's Black books (BB v 163; RB 370a; C. Maillard, Cahiers jungiens de psychanalyse 134, 2011, 127-8). Joachim's "vision": JW 220 = JL ii 136, cf. M. Reeves, Joachim of Fiore and the prophetic future (London 1976) 3-5, 19 with L. DeVun, Prophecy, alchemy and the end of time (New York 2009) 47 as well as J.V. Fleming in Joachim of Fiore and the influence of inspiration, ed. J.E. Wannenmacher (Farnham 2013) 75-98; and for Joachim's own "secret" knowledge, M. Goldish, The Sabbatean prophets (Cambridge, MA 2004) 12-13. Of course other prophets also figure prominently in Aion -- for Ezekiel see JK 171 = JL ii 118; for Gnostics and prophecy, Aion 184 §287; for Nostradamus, ibid. 95-102 and 125-6 with Owens 280 -- but none of them plays as crucial a role as Joachim. "Path of blood and suffering": PP 6 (1975) 12. "The vast majority ... splitting of the world": JW 222, cf. JL ii 137-8 (November 1953). Jung's "remarkable leap": P. Bishop, Jung's Answer to Job' (Hove 2002) 154. "As a modern Joachim di Fiore ...": J.P. Dourley, J/7P 8/1 (2006) 44, cf. his On behalf of the mystical fool (Hove 2010) 56, 120-1, 175. On Merlin as "taken up again" by Jung in his psychology see MMDR 216/228; for the phrase's karmic implications, ibid. 295/319. For the intertwining of prophetic traditions derived from Joachim of Fiore with prophetic traditions ascribed to Merlin, cf. Reeves, The influence of prophecy in the later Middle Ages (Oxford 1969) 47, 52-3, 56 with n.4, 57 with n.3, 93-6, 222, 253 n., 434, 537-40; D.L. Hoffman in Culture and the king, ed. M.B. Shichtman and J.P. Carley (Albany 1994) 113- 28; Wannenmacher, Hermeneutik der Heilsgeschichte (Leiden 2005) 272-305. 97 Jung's identification with Merlin: JP 211, 223. For Hebrew prophets already denying that they are prophets see especially the classic example of Amos 7:14 ("I am not a prophet"); 716 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY A. Viberg, Tyndale bulletin 47 (1996) 91-114, who in effect explains Amos' archetypal denial as a deliberately ironic and self-disparaging way of avoiding inflation (111-13); M_J. de Jong, Isaiah among the ancient Near Eastern prophets (Leiden 2007) 323-8; also M. Dean -- Otting's comments in Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (2TM ed., New York 2014), ed. D.A. Leeming, 1389. For Joachim of Fiore's notorious denials that he was a prophet see e.g. M. Reeves, The influence of prophecy in the later Middle Ages (Oxford 1969) 13-16, 42; B. McGinn, Apocalyptic spirituality (Mahwah 1979) 100; K.-V. Selge, Deutsches Archiv fur Erforschung des Mittelalters 46 (1990) 92 with n.21. Other prophetic figures denying that they were prophets: Reeves 226; R.E. Lerner, The powers of prophecy (Berkeley 1983) 184; L. DeVun, Prophecy, alchemy and the end of time (New York 2009) 47. For the particular case of John of Rupescissa, whose work was well known to Jung (Aion 146 §226 with n.87, 241 §379, 265 §420, MC 192 §244, etc.), see DeVun 44-8 and 183 n.75: on one hand, at times he openly compared himself to the Old Testament prophets but on the other hand his "claim to visionary authority was certainly not without risk. Prophetic visions were thought to have been common before the incarnation and during the time of the early Church, but thereafter miracles and visions increasingly aroused suspicion" which could easily lead to imprisonment or death. Jung on the indispensability of knowing the Bible: JVi 442. On the almost universal ignorance nowadays about biblical prophecy and prophetic tradition see Mitch Glaser's recent comment: "I can safely say that, in the United States, most Jewish people would recognize Isaiah as the first name of a professional athlete sooner than they would recognize the prophet of biblical literature" (Zhe gospel according to Isaiah 53, ed. D.L. Bock and Glaser, Grand Rapids 2012, 239). The best introduction to the interests and studies of Jung's father is NOTES TO PAGES 353-354 717 still J. Ryce- -- Menuhin in Jung and the monotheisms, ed. Ryce- Menuhin (London 1994) 233-40 (for references to Isaiah and Jeremiah see 236, 239, 240) with Nicholas Battye's comments on the importance of these same interests to the son, ibid. 168-70, 184, 190 n.131; see now also B.D. Walfish and M. Kizilov, Bibliographia karaitica (Leiden 2011) 408. For Jung's unconscious acknowledgement of his father's inner immersion in Old Testament wisdom and learning, which is clearly much more than a compensation for his conscious attitude towards him, cf. MDR 203-10/213-20; David 'Tacey's superficial portrayal of the relationship between son and father as a conflict between prophet and priest ignores the many subtleties of the situation, just as Tacey's unwittingly new -- age misuse of the word "prophet" dilutes it to the point of meaninglessness (The darkening spirit, Hove 2013, 45-6, 51-2). It will be noted that, in Jung's family, not only his father but also his maternal grandfather Samuel Preiswerk was a biblical expert and Hebrew scholar too (ETG 405-6; H.F. Ellenberger, The discovery of the unconscious, New York 1970, 661; A. Jung, JAP 56, 2011, 657). *8 Answer to Job as damnable, Jung himself as bourgeois coward alongside the "unspeakable fool": JZ ii 155. Landing the whale: ibid. 17-18. The magnificent music: ibid. 116 (HC 328 = A] 157). The one book he would never want to rewrite or change: M.-L. von Franz, C.G. Jung: his myth in our time (New York 1975) 161; but this isn't to say he didn't initially spend a huge amount of energy revising the text that had just come through him, and removing its more obvious crudities (KJ 1; D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 528; 5. Shamdasani in C.G. Jung, Answer to Job, Princeton 2010, viii). Answer to Job as a necessary compensation for the "man-made" politeness of Aion: JL ii 155; on the relationship between the two books see also PR 357, JL 718 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY ii 281-2, MDR 206/216. For the thread connecting Answer to Job back to the Red book see Jung in Combat (9 October 1952) 7 ("I waited for forty years to write it ... for almost forty years'), cf. JS 225, 234; Shamdasani in Jung, Answer to Job ix-x and JAP 55 (2010) 41; L.S. Owens, PP 54 (2011) 273 and in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 31. On the links between Answer to Job and the Seven sermons to the dead, in particular, see e.g. JN 299 (5 December 1951); letter from Cary Baynes to Carl Jung dated 31 March 1952 (CBA); Henry Corbin, ZJ 31 (1962) 11-12 = 47 175-6 and in C.G. Jung, Réponse a Job (Paris 1964) 260-1 = AJ 158-9; L. Schlamm in Dreaming the myth onwards, ed. L. Huskinson (Hove 2008) 118 n.3. It came through sickness: JZ ii 18, 34 (JN 309), 112, 116 ("pendant une maladie, dans la fiévre": HC 328 = 4] 157), 155; von Franz 161; P. Bishop, Jung's Answer to Job' (Hove 2002) 41. Repeatedly when describing the onset of Answer to Job Jung emphasizes how helpless and choiceless he was, swept along by its arrival and unable to stop it: JZ ii 18 ("tour de force of the unconscious"), 20 (its arrival was just "like the spirit seizing one by the scruff of the neck"), 39-40, 112 ("not mine to control ... like it or not"), 116 ("Le livre 'm'est venu'": HC 328 =_4/ 157) also JP 302. For the comments from people near to him about the experience of living through the time when he was working on Answer to Job, and for his gardener as "closer to reality. Jung lived now in another world", see Bair 528. On his earlier sleeplessness while writing Aion see especially JW 118 = JZ i 492 (also JW 103 = JL i 480, or ii 18 for Answer to Job); and note that in many ways this took him back to the sleepless nights he had experienced during, as well as after, the height of his work on the Red book (RB 211, 223a, 237 n.81, 238b, cf. 262a, 264b, 296a and, later, MDR 273 -- 4/293). Compare also his telling observations about the sleeplessness that comes with entering the world of archetypes (VZ i 283-5) -- as well as his general NOTES TO PAGES 354-357 719 philosophy that, "when one could not sleep', this meant "the unconscious had something to say and one should get up and write to find out what was waiting for expression" (T. Keller, Inward light 35, 1972, 11 = The memoir of Tina Keller -- Jenny, ed. W.K. Swan, New Orleans 2011, 20-1 §48, cf. 35 §94). " Arguing not about God but directly, without keeping any distance, with God: JN 309 = JZ ii 34. Thanked by his father for writing Answer to Job: 8. Shamdasani in C.G. Jung, Answer to Job (Princeton 2010) ix n.5; Cary Baynes, for her part, was not impressed (VL 170). Compare with this Jung's comments on the inability of his father, while still alive, to quarrel with God (MDR 96- -- 7/92-3) as well as the crucial dream he had of his father which anticipated the task of writing Answer to Job (JP 80-2; MDR 206-10/216-20; M. Stein, JAP 52, 2007, 312). Job and Christ as suffering servants: MDR 206/216. For Jung on the "deceptive light" of reason see e.g. ACU 93 §173. "I live in my deepest hell ...": M.-L. von Franz, C.G. Jung: his myth in our time (New York 1975) 174; compare JN 309 = JL ii 34, "I have to be everywhere Jeneath and not above". On the "tragic self-contradiction" of God see ETG 220 ("tragische Gegensatzlichkeit"; cf. MDR 206/216). Jung finds himself accused of anti-Semitism or, at the very least, anti-Judaism because of Answer to Job: note e.g. A. Jafté's comments, Was C.G. Jung a mystic? (Einsiedeln 1989) 74-5 together with the observations by R. Valois, Laval théologique et philosophique 48 (1992) 293; S.M. Wasserstrom, Religion after religion (Princeton 1999) 177, 232 -- 4 with Journal of the American Academy of Religion 69 (2001) 461; and writers such as J.A. Pople (Jo speak well of God, Fair Oak 2009, 81-2) who accuses both book, and author, of satanic folly. Such critics show no awareness of the extent to which radical questioning of God and arguing with the divine are essential aspects of Jewish piety (F. Rosenzweig, 720 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY Gesammelte Schriften i/1, The Hague 1979, 694; C.E.M. Struyker Boudier in Questions and questioning, ed. M. Meyer, Berlin 1988, 13-14; D.A. Frank, Argumentation and advocacy 41, 2004, 74, 79) or of the very particular recent tendency in Judaism to revive the ancient prophetic privilege of arguing with God as "a form of post-holocaust Jewish theology" (D.R. Blumenthal, Modern Judaism 12, 1992, 105-110). Jewish traditions in Answer to Job: L. Schlamm in Dreaming the myth onwards, ed. L. Huskinson (Hove 2008) 115, 117, 118 n.9; §.L. Drob, Kabbalistic visions (New Orleans 2010) 213, 290 n.28; and compare also Henry Corbin's comments in H/ 264 = AJ 107; there is more than a little irony in the way that certain Jewish authors have taken issue with Jung's Answer to Job for not being Jewish enough (E.A. Lévy-Valensi, Jod: réponse a Jung, Paris 1991: cf. Valois 291-5). For the specifics of Jewish prophets challenging and arguing with God see e.g. A. Laytner, Arguing with God (Lanham 1990); Frank 71-86. "In a very real sense it's an argument with God ..." ("In gewissem Sinne ist es ein Streitgesprach mit Gott, ein Anliegen ahnlich dem Abrahams, als er mit Gott rechtete ..."): JN 298 (5 December 1951), cf. JZ ii 33 n.1. I have translated "in gewissem Sinne" here, coming straight after "eigentlich", as "in a very real sense" because "in a certain sense" fails to convey the force or strength of the German original. Neumann is referring in particular to Abraham's argument with God about the fate of Sodom: Genesis 18:22 -- 33. Abraham described as a prophet: ibid. 20:7; Neumann's comparison of Jung to Abraham of course has extra poignancy because ever since Jung was a boy he had, instinctively, been compared to Abraham (JP 49, MDR 74/66). On Habakkuk as archetypal arguer with God see e.g. Laytner 29, 180-2, 252 n.14, 270 n.19; for some extended comments on the closeness between the biblical Book of Habakkuk and the Book of Job see D.E. Gowan, The triumph NOTES TO PAGES 357-358 721 of faith in Habakkuk (Atlanta 1976); and note that Jung himself interprets Job's predicament not only in the light of Abraham's argument over Sodom but also with the help of Habakkuk (Aion 58-60 §§105-111). The cry of Habakkuk: Habakkuk 1:2, 2:11. '*° For Jung's awareness of the most apparently ordinary objects as living and conscious beings see e.g. [JP 28; JS 147; JL ii 344; M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 98. Philemon, "beloved father of prophets" (RB 154), as giver of the awareness that even one's most ordinary thoughts are conscious living entities: JP 24, MDR 176/183. This same awareness of everything, even one's own thoughts or words, as living and conscious beings is included -- according to the "Gnostic -- Hellenistic" world Philemon belonged to (JP 23-4, cf. MDR 176/182) -- in the gift traditionally given to prophets. See e.g. Theophrastus, On the senses 4 = A.H. Coxon, The fragments of Parmenides (2TM ed., Las Vegas 2009) 142-3 §45 for the case of Parmenides (pan to on echein tina gnosin); Empedocles fr. 110.8-10 Diels = fr. 156.10-13 Gemelli Marciano with ENM 399-404, Reality 518-33; Corpus hermeticum 13.11 (a passage well known to Jung) and the Hermetic Asclepius 19 with R. Reitzenstein, Poimandres (Leipzig 1904) 214-50 plus ENM 351 and n.39, 353. Marie -- Louise von Franz is a fine example of the disciple who takes turns at transforming the unmediated experience of everything as alive into an item of dogma, dutifully learning certain of its signs and symptoms by rote, and nervously trying to dismiss it as a joke (F'R/J i 51:01-55:26; MH 1:13:55-1:16:03; PP 38, 1998, 16, 26-7). On the crucial importance for Jung of his pipe smoking see e.g. JZ ii 105; B. Hannah, Jung, his life and work (New York 1976) 281 (through his near-death experience in 1944 he left everything as well as everybody behind until "the 722 THREE : THE SUNSET WAY only earthly thought that crossed his mind was that he hoped no one would disturb his pipes, as if somewhere he knew he was going to need them again"); D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 564 (after Emma Jung's death in 1955 he sat "staring into a distance that only he could see. He even forgot to fuss with his many pipes, which alarmed his children most of all"). Habakkuk as the name of Jung's tobacco pot: A. Jaffé, From the life and work of C.G. Jung (2TM ed., Einsiedeln 1989) 145 (his tobacco was kept by him "in a dark bronze box, which for some unaccountable reason bore the name 'Habakkuk'""'); R. Hayman, 4 life of Jung (London 1999) 309-10; G. Lachman, Jung the mystic (New York 2010) 146-7; 1 am very grateful to Jung's grandson Andreas for giving me a photo of Habakkuk. Handed down from his grandfather: MDR 329/358. NOTES TO PART FOUR ' "Effort of spiritual struggle ... one might even say that they are frankly hostile to them": 'Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji in H. Corbin, Spiritual body and celestial earth (Princeton 1977) 171; cf. APMM 381, 387. For Corbin's use of the term "prophetic philosophy" see especially EJ 31 (1962) 49-116; Histoire de la philosophie islamique (Paris 1964 and 1986: History of Islamic philosophy, London 1993); L'Iran et la philosophie (Paris 1990: The voyage and the messenger, Berkeley 1998); EIT i 12-13, 43-53, 235, iii 222-3, 249-50 and iv 68-83, 418-24; Corps spirituel et terre céleste (2"4 ed., Paris 1979) 12-13 (SB xii -- xiii); and note in particular his emphasis on the tradition that, without this unbroken chain of prophetic philosophy, humanity would be totally deaf and blind and lost (EI iv 419 = L'homme et son ange, Paris 1983, 251; cf. Parmenides fr. 6.4 -- 7 Diels = fr. 13.5-8 Gemelli Marciano). On the great Presocratics, most notably Empedocles, as links in the chain of prophetic philosophers see e.g. EJJi 225 n.194, ii 70 n.88; Corps spirituel (2"¢ ed.) 12 (SB xii); P. Lory, Jabir ibn Hayyan, L'Elaboration de l'élixir supréme (Damascus 1988) 14-16; APMM 371-91. There even happened to be Persian Sufis who were perfectly aware of the crucial role Aristotle played in distorting and corrupting this tradition of prophetic philosophy by trying to make sure 724 FOUR : CATAFALQUE that "the traces of the paths of the ancient sages disappeared" (Shahraziri in OMM ii 5.19-6.6 = SSO 80-1; J. Walbridge and H. Ziai, Subrawardi: 'The philosophy of illumination, Provo 1999, xl-xli; APMM 387). It perhaps should be noted that modern academics who make a specialty of venturing into the field of esotericism have taken Corbin, as well as me (K. von Stuckrad, Numen 49, 2002, 214-15), to task for the apparent mistake of finding meaning in the subjects we write about: "the moment a scholar leaves the position of impartiality or 'methodological agnosticism" and highlights certain "claims and opinions as more true or valuable than others, he starts practicing what I have been referring to as 'eclectic historiography' on the basis of some philosophical or theological a priori" (WJ. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the academy, Cambridge 2012, 310). Of course what these academics conveniently fail to mention is the elephant in the room -- the huge philosophical and theological assumptions, collective as well as unspoken, under which they themselves labour. If such a rumoured "position of impartiality" exists, as a genuine objectivity, it lies far beyond the reach of such scholars. "One colleague from a distant country ... 'the mouth speaks from the fullness of the heart'": HC 51 (June 1978); cf. A. Schimmel in H. Corbin, Die smaragdene Vision (Munich 1989) 16-17, H.T. Hakl, Eranos (Sheffield 2013) 165. Secretum meum mihi (to mystérion mou emoi in Greek: R.R. Ottley, The book of Isaiah according to the Septuagint ii, Cambridge 1906, 223) is quoted by Corbin from the Latin Vulgate version of Isaiah 24:16. Ummah is the specific term in Islam for any group of loyal people who gather around a prophet and, of course, around Muhammad in particular. "The mouth speaks from the fullness of the heart": Matthew 12:34, Luke 6:45. NOTES TO PAGES 364-368 725 > "Absolute spiritual freedom": Revue de culture européenne 5 (1953) 12 = AJ 265; cf. HC 48 ("integral spiritual freedom"). Jung "said that if we belong to the secret church ... can bring us there": Esther Harding's note of her conversation with Jung at his home in Kiisnacht on 5 July 1922, Quadrant 8/2 (Winter 1975) 9; cf. JS 29. Jung here cites in particular the alternative manuscript tradition of Luke 6:4, "If thou knowest what thou doest, blessed art thou ..." (A. Resch, Agrapha, 2" ed., Leipzig 1906, 45-8). For Jung on the invisible or spiritual church see e.g. CS 19-20 with RB 211 n.176, MC 12-61 §§9-12, JL ii 215; for Corbin on the "secret church" compare passages such as his Temple et contemplation (2TM ed., Paris 2006) 315, 456. * HC 46 (June 1978). Significantly, for anyone who understands these things, Corbin goes on to suggest that the only people he could talk with in Istanbul about his experiences were Bektashi Sufis. From a strictly historical perspective, it will be noted that he had first been introduced to Suhrawardi's work by Louis Massignon ten years earlier (ibid. 16, 40-1). For the meaning of ketman compare Corbin's comments in EJ 30 (1961) 74, 93; ibid. 39 (1970) 126 = L'homme et son ange (Paris 1983) 187; EIT iii 177, 297, iv 244. This cryptic account of the crucial encounter with his inner teacher was not brief enough to prevent some modern scholars from twisting and misusing it to further their own foolish ends by finding support in it either for their allegation that Corbin was a fascist (S.M. Wasserstrom, Religion after religion, Princeton 1999, 146-7, cf. Journal of the American Academy of Religion 69, 2001, 461) or for their naive attempt to portray him as a "rational gnostic" (J,J. Kripal, The serpent's gift, Chicago 2007, 109-10). On the other hand, it was too brief to prevent Daniel Proulx from describing Corbin's famous experience at a Swedish lake in 1932 as 726 FOUR !: CATAFALQUE "the only spiritual experience he ever spoke of": a mystical experience which is "extremely important because in the life of Corbin it represents the one moment when he touched the divine mystery" (Os trabalhos da imaginazao: abordagens teéricas e modelizagées, ed. J -- J. Wunenburger, A.F. Araujo and R. de Almeida, Joio Pessoa 2018; for the experience in Sweden see HC 62-3). This sadly misguided attempt to reduce the mystical component of Corbin's life to a single if formative experience is an unfortunate by-product of the modern academic insistence on promoting Corbin the philosopher at the cost of suppressing, as much as possible, Corbin the mystic. But Corbin, on his own public admission and as confirmed to me in private on numerous occasions by his wife, was an Ishraqi; for any Ishragi in the lineage of Suhrawardi, the direct experience of a mystic and the clear thinking of a philosopher were equally indispensable (see e.g. AE xvi-xx with EII ii 68-72 as well as iii 223, where Corbin emphatically appeals to the Jungian concept of individuation); and, if for some reason a choice ever had to be made between them, the mystical would instantly take priority and precedence over the philosophical (ibid. ii 71). As Daryoush Shayegan observes, what distinguished Corbin from his colleagues wasn't the fact that he understood and explained the materials he commented on better than anyone else. It was the fact that he had lived, and personally experienced, everything he wrote about (Mélanges offerts a Henry Corbin. ed. S.H. Nasr, Tehran 1977, 29). * With regard to the meaning of ishraég: the majority of scholars have strangely lost touch with the basic reality that, for Suhrawardi himself, the sense of the word will have been determined above all by the famous passage in the Qur'an where it refers to the glorious moment of the sun rising over the mountains at dawn (38:18; compare [DPW 89-90). NOTES TO PAGE 368 72/ Corbin became perfectly aware of this reality and stated it with increasing clarity as he got older. See for example his immensely quotable summary at SB 110: in the teaching of Suhrawardi the word ishrag "takes on a technical meaning. In the literal sense, it is at one and the same time the geographic East ... and the hour when the horizon is lighted by the fires of dawn. In the true sense -- that is to say, in the spiritual sense -- the Orient is the world of the beings of Light, from which the dawn of knowledge and ecstasy rises in the pilgrim of the spirit. There is no true philosophy which does not reach completion in a metaphysic of ecstasy, nor mystical experience which does not demand a serious philosophical preparation. And such precisely was the dawning wisdom ..." Also compare e.g. Les motifs zoroastriens dans la philosophie de Sohrawardi (Tehran 1946) 27-31; Histoire de la philosophie islamique (2TM ed., Paris 1986) 290-3; AE xiv -- xv (" ... On ne doit donc pas se contenter de traduire le mot Ishréq par 'illumination' ..."); L'Tran et la philosophie (Paris 1990) 131. It will be noted that not only his reference in every single one of these texts to the Latin expression cognitio matutina or "dawn consciousness" (cf. AS 247-50 §§299-303), but also his later tendency to translate ishrag as aurora consurgens (e.g. AE xiv, SB 110-11), are eloquent witnesses to the interests he would come to share with Carl Jung. To be sure, when Corbin published his first ever piece about Suhrawardi in 1933, he started by reciting the opinion that the word ishragi simply meant "illuminative" (Recherches philosophiques 2, 1932-33, 371-3); but this is only because, at that early stage, he was still heavily under the influence of older western scholarship on Suhrawardi such as Max Horten's Die Philosophie der Erleuchtung nach Subrawardi (cited ibid. 372 n.1). Corbin's own private copy of the Horten book, which came into his possession at Berlin in June 1936 (for his stay at Berlin see S. Camilleri and D. Proulx, Bulletin heideggérien 4, 2014, 728 FOUR : CATAFALQUE 21-2 with nn.42, 46; Proulx, De Ja hiérohistoire, PhD thesis, Université catholique de Louvain 2017, 211-14) and which the tram tickets still tucked away inside the book show he took with him to Turkey in 1939, was given to me in 1995 by Stella Corbin. The marginal notes inside it eloquently express his growing criticisms of Horten and his progressive departure from Horten's intellectual positions. © "T was drawn ... National Library": Problemes et méthodes d histotre des religions: Mélanges publiés par la Section des Sctences religieuses a loccasion du centenatre de | Ecole pratique des Hautes Etudes (Paris 1968) 130 = L'Iran et la philosophie (Paris 1990) 99. The English translation destroys the deliberate repetition ("I was drawn ... hen Suhrawardi took me ...": The voyage and the messenger, Berkeley 1998, 91), which is all the more significant in its deliberateness because the French verb "entrainer" also means "to train" someone: Corbin is in effect, on another level, describing the inner training that Suhrawardi put him through. For Jung's highly stylized repetitions at the start of the Red book -- "forces ... took ... robbed ... forced ... took ... robbed .... -- describing how he was held fast by the spirit of the depths, see folio i verso = RB 229b and the continuation into 230a. For Parmenides' incantatory repetition of the verb "carry", four times in the first four verses of his poem, see fr. 1.1 -- 4 Diels = fr. 8A.7-10 Gemelli Marciano; [DPW 53-4, 119-20, ENM 370-80, Reality 26 -- 7, 34-6, SW 90, 103-7. Our "superiors": Empedocles fr. 5.1 Diels = fr. 10.4 Gemelli Marciano; Reality 544-56. "Eternal leaven" (a/ -- hamirat al-azaliyyah) and "leaven of the Pythagoreans" (hamirat al-faithaghiriyyin): OMM i xli-xlii (Corbin emphasizes, xlii with n.61, that this eternal leaven NOTES TO PAGES 368-372 729 serves the purpose of constant "revivification"), 502-3; G. Bowering, The mystical vision of existence in classical Islam (Berlin 1980) 52; APMM 388-9; P. Kingsley in Crossing religious frontiers, ed. H. Oldmeadow (Bloomington, IN 2010) 43; and note the similarities with Jung's awareness of himself as a naturally leavening force ("if life had led you to take up an artificial attitude, then you wouldn't be able to stand me, because I am a natural being. By my very presence I crystalize; Iam a ferment. The unconscious of people who live in an artificial manner senses me as a danger. Everything about me irritates them, my way of speaking, my way of laughing. They sense nature": /J/W 51-2). On the factors contributing to Suhrawardi's execution for heresy see e.g. Corbin, L'omme et son ange (Paris 1983) 194; H. Landolt, Journal of the American Oriental Society 107 (1987) 481 and 119 (1999) 485; H. Ziai in The political aspects of Islamic philosophy, ed. C.E. Butterworth (Cambridge, MA 1992) 336-43 with nn.104, 108; A.-M. Eddeé in La religion civique a l'époque médiévale et moderne, ed. A. Vauchez (Rome 1995) 236-41. Suhrawardi and Empedocles: Corbin, Recherches philosophiques 2 (1932-33) 377-8; Les motifs zoroastriens dans la philosophie de Sohrawarai (Tehran 1946) 23; OMM ii 24; SSO 80, 88, 150-1 (cf. J. Walbridge and H. Ziai, Subrawardi: The philosophy of illumination, Provo 1999, xl, 2, 107-8), 242-4, 253; APMM 375 n.12, 380-90; Walbridge, The leaven of the ancients (Albany 2000) 29-54. * For the subterranean but potent influence of Mani and Manichaean Gnostic tradition on Suhrawardi see e.g. Corbin's Les motifs zoroastriens dans la philosophie de Sohrawardi (Tehran 1946) 49 n.47 with AE 27 n.20, 40, 87 n.115, 268 plus the further references in 280 n.c, 281 n.6, 400 plus 409 n.17 (on 730 FOUR : CATAFALQUE Mani's reputation as a painter), 475; OMM ii 51-5; EIT ii 57-8; SSO 408 n.a; also APMM 380-4 with n.38; and for a few general observations on Manichaean influences in Islam cf. M. Gil, Israel oriental studies 12 (1992) 38-41 with A. Esmailpour, Manichaean gnosis and creation myth (Sino -- Platonic papers 156, Philadelphia 2005). It will be noted that, in private, Corbin talked of himself as not only an Ishragi but a Gnostic: see, for example, his letter to Gershom Scholem dated 2 November 1973 and reproduced by Paul Fenton in Henry Corbin: philosophies et sagesses des religions du Livre, ed. M.A. Amir -- Moezzi, C. Jambet and P. Lory (Turnhout 2005) 163-4. For his published comments on the wisdom embedded in oriental traditions of spiritual chivalry, and their links to the western Grail legends, see e.g. his foreword to Traités des compagnons -- chevaliers, ed. M. Sarraf (Tehran 1973) 5-12; EIT iv 410-30 and L'homme et son ange (Paris 1983) 202-60 with C.-H. de Fouchécour in Henry Corbin: philosophies et sagesses 137-9, cf. also [DPW 217-19. "My Iranian friends ... ulterior motive": HC 51 ("c'est 1a, je crois, ce qui mit parfaitement a l'aise mes amis iraniens pour me témoigner ... une amitié libre de toute arriére -- pensée'). ? On the blunt criticisms of Corbin by both Seyyed Hossein Nasr and 'Allamah Tabataba'i for failing to take a physical teacher or, by implication, convert to Islam see 8.H. Nasr and R. Jahanbegloo, In search of the sacred (Santa Barbara 2010) 105; also ibid. 93, where a false etymology of the word "orthodoxy" is used by Seyyed Hossein Nasr to press his religious concerns ("The main point of difference that I had with Corbin concerned the question of orthodoxy, which ... means to possess the truth"). Nasr not only permitted but clearly encouraged one of his closest disciples to contrast NOTES TO PAGES 372-373 731 Nasr's own "authentically Sufi" voice with the writings on Sufism by Corbin which, because he had never converted to Islam and so was not "a Sufi in a tenable sense of the term", are devoid of any fundamental legitimacy or authority (ibid. xxix); he also implies as much, himself, by insisting that the sacred teachings of Suhrawardi can only be "fully assimilated" through participation in "an orthodox tradition" (The Islamic intellectual tradition in Persia, ed. M.A. Razavi, Richmond, Surrey 1996, 169). On Corbin's refusal to become a Muslim, or accept a physical teacher, cf. also Nasr, Temenos Academy review 2 (1999) 35 = Esotérisme, gnoses et imaginaire symbolique, ed. R. Caron, J. Godwin, W,J. Hanegraaff and J.-L. Vieillard -- Baron (Leuven 2001) 785; H.T. Hakl, Eranos (Sheffield 2013) 356 n.113. Nasr appeals in the context of Corbin's inner spirituality to the Uwaisis, Khidr and Elijah: In search of the sacred 105; Corbin for his part, far from considering the attachment to an inner teacher as opposed to an outer sheikh unusual or questionable in Islam, even judged it the most primordial and least decadent form of Islamic spirituality (X. Accart, Politica hermetica 16, 2002, 185). For the romantic cliché of Suhrawardi stretching out his hand and taking the hand of his disciple see Nasr, Thaditional Islam in the modern world (London 1987) 277 ("almost literally"), 284; Temenos Academy review 2 (1999) 37, 40 = Esotérisme, gnoses et imaginaire symbolique 787, 790. Nasr was willing to take much more seriously al -- Hallaj's "visitation" of Louis Massignon, who had been the formal teacher and predecessor of Corbin in Paris (Traditional Islam 254 -- 6); but this is simply because he had particular uses for Massignon which were quite separate from the ways that, on his own candid admission, he "made use" of Corbin Un search of the sacred 93). To him Henry Corbin would always be someone who had a special imaginative "ability to fly into the 732 FOUR : CATAFALQUE world of traditional philosophical and spiritual speculation and meditation" (Traditional Islam 274) while his experience of Suhrawardi, far from being choiceless or imposed on him, was ultimately just the result of his own human wanting and choosing ("Corbin wanted to have a spiritual guide but did not want to have a human guide": In search of the sacred 105). '? For the quintessential mistranslation of Suhrawardi's "eternal leaven", al -- hamirat al-azaliyyah, as "eternal dough" see S.H. Nasr, Islamic philosophy from its origin to the present (Albany 2006) 159; subsequently reprinted in The essential Seyyed Hossein Nasr, ed. W.C. Chittick (Bloomington, IN 2007) 112. Ironically, Nasr had introduced his book by summarizing my work on Parmenides and Empedocles "in order to demonstrate that the relation between philosophy and prophecy ... is of great significance not only for the understanding of Islamic philosophy but also for a deeper comprehension of the origins of Western philosophy itself" (Islamic philosophy 1-5; compare Nasr's reviews of my books in Journal of Islamic studies 8, 1997, 242-4 and Parabola 29/2, Summer 2004, 106-11). Perhaps even more ironic in the light of such a blatant mistranslation is the enthusiastic praise Nasr had showered on Louis Massignon, Corbin's academic teacher, for stressing the importance of arriving at a precise appreciation of the technical vocabulary used by Sufis if one wants to understand what they mean (Traditional Islam in the modern world, London 1987, 260-1). That this mistranslation is no accident but a deliberate and doctrinaire alteration of Suhrawardi's teachings is quite clear from the fixed set of beliefs Nasr, as a "Traditionalist" Muslim, was labouring under. Whereas Corbin had a fine appreciation for Suhrawardi's vision of sacred history in which "every exoteric opposition between Greek sages and 'oriental' sages disappears', and according to which spiritual traditions NOTES TO PAGES 373-374 733 naturally jump between East and West and then back again (EIT ii 35 -- 6; cf. e.g. OMM i xiii and SSO 245 with, on the historical accuracy of these movements, P. Kingsley, JWCI 57, 1994, 1-13), for Nasr the only true end point or starting point can be the religion of Islam ("the primordial religion, a return to the original religion of oneness, and the final religion': The heart of Islam, New York 2002, 18 = The essential Seyyed Hossein Nasr 54). To him, all previous revealed or prophetic traditions were only truly activated and brought to their "full glory" in the protective fold of Islam (Islamic philosophy 159 = The essential Seyyed Hossein Nasr 112; compare The heart of Islam 18). As for Nasr's assertion that Suhrawardi, in tracing his lineage back to figures such as Empedocles, was talking not historically but only symbolically: this has to be understood in the light of his theological claim that prophets owe nothing to the past or to history because they receive all their wisdom straight from God (Islam rejects the idea that it has inherited older prophets' teachings "through temporal and historical transmission, for a prophet owes nothing to anyone and receives everything from Heaven": ibid. 18). That Suhrawardi was not establishing a historical link between himself and earlier, pre-Islamic figures (Suhrawardi "never mentions historical chains connecting him to this long tradition of wisdom", Islamic philosophy 159, aside from choosing to use pre-Islamic symbols "his spiritual affiliation was certainly completely Islamic", An introduction to Islamic cosmological doctrines, 2°4 ed., London 1978, 191) is palpably untrue: see e.g. G. Bowering, The mystical vision of existence in classical Islam (Berlin 1980) 52-5, APMM 386-90. And to insist that Suhrawardi saw the link to his predecessors as not historical but just symbolic (see now also H. Ziai in The political aspects of Islamic philosophy, ed. C.E. Butterworth, Cambridge, MA 1992, 344; A. Hartmann in Biographical encyclopaedia of Sufis: Central Asia and Middle East, ed. N. 734 FOUR : CATAFALQUE Hanif, New Delhi 2002, 465) is, if nothing else, ridiculously disrespectful; not many people go to their deaths for "only" a symbol. Besides, to formulate such a simplistic contrast between the historic and the symbolic is to rationalize and also trivialize the meaning of the word "symbol" itself -- which for both Suhrawardit (OMM ii 24; SSO 88-9 with 89 n.a, 243) and Corbin (see e.g. AWA 13-14 on the importance of healing the split "between symbol and history"), as well as Jung, includes and embraces physical reality because it's so much greater. These are all examples of what happens when a little bit of spiritual truth is trapped inside intelligent but rigid minds, only to be changed into something piously false. And at the same time the apparently simple mistake of translating "leaven" as "dough" is a vivid reminder of how, through one strategic mistranslation, an entire worldview can be distorted and destroyed. "Extraordinary joy ... intellectual vacuum": letter from Jung to Corbin dated 4 May 1953 (FC); HC 328 = AJ 156, cf. JL ii 115. Jung went on to describe the "avalanche of prejudice, misunderstandings and, above all, atrocious stupidity" he had been buried under and Corbin himself, in later reflecting on these words of his, would shrewdly talk about the "vigilant incomprehension" that was surrounding Jung (C.G. Jung, Réponse @ Job, Paris 1964, 248 =.4J 150; compare Jung's own repeated reference to those things that are "assiduously overlooked": e.g. dion 173 §268, MC xvii). The mystical theme of horses recognizing each other by their smell is appropriate, and traditional: "Those who in this world live in joy and agreement with one another must have been akin to one another in yonder place. Here they love one another and are called the friends of God, and they are brethren who NOTES TO PAGES 374-376 735 love one another for God's sake. These souls know each other by the smell, like horses. Though one be in the East and the other in the West, yet they feel joy and comfort in each other's talk" (R.A. Nicholson, Studies in Islamic mysticism, Cambridge 1921, 56; Mohammad Ebn-e Monavvar, The secrets of God's mystical oneness, Costa Mesa 1992, 466). For the gross misrepresentations in Tom Cheetham's now-standard account of the relationship between Corbin and Jung, see e.g. his All the world an icon (Berkeley 2012) 130-89. Corbin's thrills and excitement: ibid. 137, 158. His failure to carve in stone: ibid. 140. Most of Cheetham's bizarre examples of "why Corbin had such trouble with Jung" (158) -- such as the contradiction he claims to find between Corbin's rejection of the collective and Jung's acceptance of it (147-9, 152: "Here again is Corbin's protest against the authority of the Church, any church ... Here he makes his differentiation from Jung clear once more") -- show that even though he may have taken some trouble to read Jung's words, he had little success at understanding them. Ironically it was Corbin himself who warned against the great dangers of misunderstanding the word "collective" in Jung's notion of a "collective unconscious" (HC 48); but in vain. For the infinite complexity of the real relationships, on an esoteric level, between what outwardly can appear to be quite different individuals or groups see my comments in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 3 (1992) 339- 46; IDPW 160-92; Reality 477-99. '2 For the first meeting between Corbin and Jung, "si cordial, si communicatif et plein de promesses', see Corbin's letter to Olga Froébe -- Kapteyn dated 6 September 1949 (FC; 4] 163). Corbin had already referred to the cognitio matutina or "consciousness of dawn" in Les motifs zoroastriens dans la philosophie de 736 FOUR : CATAFALQUE Sohrawardi (Tehran 1946) 28; compare his later elaborations on the theme in e.g. L'homme de lumiére dans le soufisme iranien (Paris 1971) 91-2 = The man of light in Iranian Sufism (Boulder 1978) 59. Jung had published an important piece about the cognitio matutina during the year before their meeting: Symbolik des Geistes (Zurich 1948) 144 -- 8; cf. AS 247-50 §§299-303. This "synchronicity" of converging interests, as Jung would have called it, was referred to by Corbin as "homophonie": HC 262 ("... une 'homophonie', dont le sentiment nous a chaque fois bouleversés ..."); H.-T. Hakl, Eranos (Sheffield 2013) 165; and for the general sentiment compare R. Bernardini, Historia religionum 5 (2013) 100. 3 Corbin would describe his encounter with Jung over Answer to Job, and over his own review of it, as "a great encounter which took place between us, our previous encounters had only been its prelude" (letter to Carl Jung dated 14 August 1953, FC). He had already hailed Jung's Aion as a magnificent piece of work (letter to Olga Frobe -- Kapteyn dated 22 November 1951, FC; R. Bernardini, Historia religionum 5, 2013, 101). "The rarest of experiences ... completely understood": letter from Jung to Corbin dated 4 May 1953 (FC); HC 328 = 4] 156, cf. JZ ii 115. For Answer to Job as music see Corbin's review in Revue de culture européenne 5 (1953) 37 = HJ 285, Jung's response in his letter dated 4 May 1953 (FC; HC 328 = AJ 157, cf. JZ ii 116) and Corbin's later comments in C.G. Jung, Réponse a Job (Paris 1964) 255-6 = AJ 155. Murray Stein offers a useful sketch of the extent to which "Answer to Job occupies a unique place in Jung's published oeuvre" (JAP 52, 2007, 311-13). But by presenting Father Victor White as the decisive trigger that initiated the entire creative process he is simply contributing to the progressive, and degenerative, tendency in Jungian psychology to personalize and also trivialize the NOTES TO PAGES 376-378 737 numinous. It's not Victor White who was the piece of sand in the oyster that gave rise to this literary pearl (ibid. 310). The irritating piece of sand was called Carl Jung. 4 On Answer to Job as embodying the most essential aspect of Jung's work and task see MDR 206/216. The stupidity of the medical profession, together with its attitude of mockery towards everything that Answer to Job represents -- as well as the intense awareness that this collective rationalistic attitude had become his own idiocy, a part of his own shadow -- is beautifully encapsulated by Jung in the account he gives of the related dream he had about the two Brunner doctors (JP 80-1, MDR 207-8/217-18). As he would sum up the same situation in 1953: "the clinical practice of psychotherapy is a mere expedient, which prevents numinous experiences as much as possible" (JK 171). For Jung's painful confrontation with the stupidity and stubbornness of his own "dull conscious mind" see the letter he wrote to Henry Murray on 2 May 1925 (Papers of Henry A. Murray, Harvard University Archives; cf. JL i 42, RB 215a). 15 On the incomprehension Jung encountered even among his most trusted Jungian analysts in Zurich, when he solicited their reactions to Answer to Job before the book was ready to be released, see KI 1; JK 157 n.4. His own considered response could hardly have been more to the point: very few people anywhere will be able to understand the book "and analysts are not exceptional people" (JK 157, 29 January 1953). By no means is it insignificant that even James Kirsch, who prided himself on his uniquely sympathetic appraisal of Answer to Job, was reprimanded by Jung for approaching the book in a way that was "too rational" (ibid. 149). Jung's followers and Christ's disciples at Gethsemane: JP 306-8. 738 FOUR : CATAFALQUE '© For Henry Corbin on Jung as a prophet, and on Answer to Job as a work of prophecy, see especially Revue de culture européenne 5 (1953) 16 ("ce méme livre ... n'est plus simplement de la psychologie, mais ressortit 4 la philosophie prophétique'), 23, 33 ("ce qui est proprement la perspective prophétique et eschatologique chez Jung"), 37 (""prophéte de la Sophia éternelle"), 38 = HJ 269, 274, 282, 285, 286. Aniela Jaffé was quick here to catch the essential and, at the Eranos gathering in 1974, was only too-happy to ascribe to Corbin the idea of Jung as a prophet which she would hardly dare attribute to herself (Was C.G. Jung a mystic?, Einsiedeln 1989, 94 = EJ 43, 1974, 358); it will be noted that Henry Corbin was physically present as a participant in this Eranos gathering and spoke at length on the theme of visionary prophecy (ibid. 183-254). Recently, English-speaking commentators have taken it upon themselves to claim that in his review of Answer to Job Corbin committed some major mistakes of interpretation and that Jung made an even bigger mistake in imagining Corbin had understood him (so L. Schlamm, Harvest 50/2, 2004, 189 followed by T. Cheetham, All the world an icon, Berkeley 2012, 146-7). These commentators should not be blamed too much for their own confused and mistaken impression that everyone else was mistaken and confused, because they unwisely were basing their judgements on the appalling "translation" of Corbin's review into English which has been published by Molly Tuby (Harvest 31, 1985, 7-22). Aside from being riddled with inaccuracies (for example her "Darkness has received Light which has vanquished it", ibid. 18, fails completely to convey the multiple resonances in Corbin's account of how according to Christian dogma "les Ténébres aient enfin recu la Lumiére et que la Lumiere les ait prises et captivées": he is commenting here on PR 468 §756), Tuby's version is rendered worse than useless by the way that she chopped up Corbin's NOTES TO PAGE 378 739 words and -- supposedly for the sake of saving space -- gouged out most of the essential connecting passages in his review. The fine thread of logic running through his text is repeatedly snapped, statements are torn out of their context, and the original sense is turned into nonsense. As for the disaster of hacking such a delicate and extended piece of argument to bits: Corbin himself already said everything that needs to be said when, apologizing to the original French publisher for the length of his review, he explained how he'd tried in vain to reduce its size only to realize that to cut anything out "would be a massacre ... one has to have the whole of it available in front of one's eyes" ("ce serait un massacre ... Il faut qu'on ait tout sous les yeux 4 la fois": letter to Sten Melry dated 19 March 1953, FC). And there are far larger issues at stake here, as well. To take the naive theoretical position that in Jung's own eyes light and darkness were simple equals waiting to be integrated with each other psychologically is to ignore what Corbin himself, when referring to Jung's psychology, described with such appropriateness as "the lived situation" ("la situation vécue": La table ronde 97, 1956, 37 = Lilran et la philosophie, Paris 1990, 235). We forget everything of any real importance when we fail to remember that Jung viewed his essential task as being "to illuminate the stupidity, darkness, and unconsciousness of mankind" (SL 671-2 §§1515-17, 827-9 §§1827-33); or fail to remember his very dualistic grief on seeing, just before he died, how naive he had been "in not expecting the darkness to be so dense" (E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 176). As Corbin so rightly says, with Jung we are dealing not just with psychology but also with prophecy. Aside from Corbin's own important comments on the subject (Revue de culture européenne 5, 1953, 16; HJ 269) compare also James Kirsch's account of how "in Answer to Job, and in some letters written after Answer to Job," Jung very clearly states that "he, as a psychologist, is, in 740 FOUR : CATAFALQUE fact, the prophet of the direct experience of God" (KT 5). And for Corbin's way of defining a prophet see e.g. HC 131 (also SB xii), "Le prophéte, ce n'est pas quelqu'un qui prédit l'avenir, mais l'inspiré qui profére le verbe de l'invisible, le surhumain que l'inspiration divine instaure en médiateur entre la divinité inconnaissable et l'ignorance ou l'impuissance des hommes": far from being a fortune-teller, the prophet is someone who has been "put in place by divine inspiration as mediator between the unknowable divine and the ignorance or impotence of mankind". 1" Erich Neumann on Jung and Abraham: JN 298 (5 December 1951), cf. JZ ii 33 n.1. For James Kirsch on Jung as prophet and Answer to Job as a prophetic work see his lecture, which significantly has never been published, on "C.G. Jung's individuation as shown especially in Answer to Job"; the references in the text of this lecture (KI 15) to his own piece on Jung and Freud which was published by American imago in 1984, as well as to Alfred Ribi's paper on Jung and Elijah which was published in the 1984 issue of Harvest, show that he composed it during the very last years of his life. "He, himself, told me ... afraid to look at him": KI 8. This closeness of Jung to Moses fits very well with the 1924 dialogue between Jung and Cary de Angulo about his very privileged relationship to the biblical pillar of fire draft letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 26 January 1924 = RB 213b; cf. Exodus 13:21-2, 14:24, Numbers 14:14, Nehemiah 9:12-14) as well as with the powerful dream, so intimately linked to the creation of Answer to Job, in which the part of himself represented by his father is reading straight from the Books of Moses only to be greeted by the utter incomprehension of everyone listening (JP 80, ETG 221). Also worth noting, in this context, is Jung's comment to Tina Keller about his hair turning grey as a result NOTES TO PAGES 378-381 741 of the overwhelming visions and experiences he had during the time of his work on the Red book (R. Noll, The Aryan Christ, New York 1997, 152): on the strong tradition of prophets' hair turning grey as a direct result of their visions and revelations compare, for instance, the famous case of Muhammad (Tafsir ihn Kathir, abridged edition, Riyadh 2003, v 17, cf. Qur'an 73:17). 8 For the continuing conversation about Answer to Job after both the book, and Corbin's review of it, had been published see H] 264 (the review "fut le point de départ de longs entretiens amicaux sur tous les points soulevés a propos du livre ...) with his letter to Olga Frobe -- Kapteyn dated 5 September 1953 (FC, R. Bernardini, Historia religionum 5, 2013, 105); for the meetings first at Ascona, then at Ktisnacht and Bollingen, HC 48. "Alas!": Corbin in C.G. Jung, Réponse a Job (Paris 1964) 255; the specific memories he offers here of "ce qui fut, hélas! notre dernier entretien" make it clear that he is referring to their discussion in September 1955. The handwritten notes which he left behind of that discussion, dated "2 September 1955 -- Ktisnacht", have been preserved in Paris together with Stella Corbin's typed transcript (FC). With characteristic disregard for detail, Michel Cazenave offers the vaguest reminiscence of Stella Corbin once showing him some notes from her husband about a discussion between him and Jung which had led Corbin to "complain" that Jung misinterpreted what he was saying by understanding it on a psychological level (Carl Gustav Jung, Escalquens 2011, 103; cf. Bernardini 95): this, too, almost certainly goes back to Corbin's notes of their discussion in September 1955 (Cazenave's memory of it taking place at Ascona rather than Kiisnacht is in line with his usual, sometimes even self-conscious, confusions over points of fact). To be sure, a couple of important errors in Stella Corbin's typed 742 FOUR : CATAFALQUE transcript made such misinterpretations of what happened between Jung and Corbin only too easy. First, she ends her record of their interaction on a note of discord -- with Corbin appearing to complain that Jung was only considering the case of someone who is mentally ill whereas he, Corbin, was considering the ideal case of a mystic. But it's quite plain from his original handwritten notes that he had wanted to bracket these words in parentheses as an issue of subordinate, rather than primary, importance. And, even more significantly, she omitted Corbin's three crucial final words which he had written in Greek on a line of their own: monos pros monon, "alone to alone". For sohbet see e.g. Coleman Barks' Rumi: the book of love (New York 2005) 12 ("Sufis say there are three ways of being with the mystery: prayer, then a step up from that, meditation, and a step up from that, conversation, the mystical exchange they call sohbet"), 102 ("The sohbet of Friendship is ... an encounter with 'a person like the dawn'"). On the tradition of mystical dialogue among Bektashi Sufis in particular, whom Corbin became intimately familiar with during his wartime years at Istanbul (HC 46), compare F. Trix, Spiritual discourse (Philadelphia 1993). To experience exactly what one is saying, and say just what one is doing, is standard procedure in the context of Bektashi sohbet (ibid. 145: "what Baba did by singing of muhabbet during a time of muhabbet was name the closeness and pleasure and joy we were having in each other's company"); James Hillman has well noted Corbin's uncanny ability to be what he said and become the physical embodiment of his words (The thought of the heart, Dallas 1981, 1-2). *® For the history of the expression monos pros monon see e.g. A.F. Segal in Studies in Gnosticism and Hellenistic religions NOTES TO PAGES 381-384 743 presented to Gilles Quispel on the occasion of his 65" birthday, ed. R. van den Broek and M.J. Vermaseren (Leiden 1981) 371-2 with n.53; K. Corrigan, Journal of religion 76 (1996) 28-32; Z. Mazur in Gnosticism, Platonism and the late ancient world, ed. Corrigan and T. Rasimus (Leiden 2013) 346 n.65; P. Kalligas, The 'Enneads' of Plotinus i (Princeton 2014) 210. On the phrase as a decisive marker, in Corbin's writings, for the process of individuation see especially ARV ii 94-107, 142 (Avicenna and the visionary recital, London 1960, 81-92, 121). For those who live the inner reality of monos pros monon as "solitary, authentically alone, freed from every collective norm" see Corbin in C.G. Jung, Réponse a Job (Paris 1964) 252 = AJ 153, but note also the strong contrast he draws in his original review between Jung "seu/, fort de la seule force de son Ame', and more or less everyone else ("Car combien d'>hommes, aujourd hui, peuvent prétendre étre vraiment les 'représentants' d'eux-mémes, alors quils ne représentent que les normes collectives, les dogmes officiels, les opinions toutes faites?" Revue de culture européenne 5, 1953, 13-14 = HJ 267). For the language here, of aloneness and being authentically oneself, compare Corbin's own translation of Martin Heidegger (Quest- ce que la métaphysique?, Paris 1951, 160 -- 4); in Sufi tradition these "solitary ones" are known as the afrad (C. Addas, Quest for the red sulphur, Cambridge 1993, 71-8). "In the sense that no one else is present to such intimacy": Corrigan 32. For the old meaning of monos pros monon in the context of human conversation cf. e.g. ibid. 31 with J-M. Narbonne, Plotinus in dialogue with the Gnostics (Leiden 2011) 98; Corbin always retained an awareness that the formula implies some kind of actual dialogue ("dialogue seul a seul", L'imagination créatrice dans le soufisme d'Ibn Arabi, 2" ed., Paris 1977, 210: the detail is lost in the English translation). His use of the formula in introducing Jung's Answer to Job: Revue de culture européenne 5 744 FOUR : CATAFALQUE (1953) 12 -- 14 = H] 265-7. "It's because we find ourselves, here, ...: ibid. 14 = HJ 267. Jung on the process of individuation as becoming a solitary star: BB v 168 = RBu 371b (the critical word "Einzelsein', "singleness" or "uniqueness", is mistranslated at RB 370b as "individuality"); compare also MDR (New York 1973) 388 = RB 352-3, where "Einzelsein" is already translated as it should be ("singleness", directly corresponding in sense to Greek monos). For Corbin describing, just before he died, the inevitability of his "separation" from Jung see HC 48-9; for Jung on the secret of individuation as the highest mystery of the Grail, JP 308-9; and for Corbin on the ultimate aloneness of God cf. e.g. AWA 184. "The ultimate, the unforgivable, truth ...: Revue de culture européenne 5 (1953) 23 = HJ 274; Corbin's comments here about the pages of Answer to Job coming to life as a prophetic hymn are repeated by him, word for word, in C.G. Jung, Réponse a Job (Paris 1964) 255 = AJ 155. 21 "Music only has any purificatory virtue ...": C.G. Jung, Réponse a Job (Paris 1964) 255-6 = AJ 155 ("la musique n'a vertu de katharsis que si elle nous conduit 4 une expérience visionnaire intérieure, au sens fort et prophétique de ce mot"). 22 Jung was already discussing Khidr, together with Elijah, at length in 1912 (JPPF 4/1, 1912, 236-45, 275 = Psychology of the unconscious, New York 1916, 216-27, 261; cf. ST 193-202 §§282 -- 96). Compare also passages in his later writings such as SZ 556 §1290, 675-7 §§1525-9, 738 §1672; JV ii 1285-6, 1312; ACU 122 §219, 133 §238, 135-47 §§240-58; CD 444-54; JL i 346 and ii 40, 571; and cf. N. Battye in Jung and the monotheisms, ed. J. Ryce~-Menuhin (London 1994) 166-91. It should never be forgotten that for Jung the real goal of psychotherapy is to find "the unconscious guide that dwells within yourself" (S. Shamdasani, Journal of sandplay therapy NOTES TO PAGES 384-386 745 24/1, 2015, 8-9, 15), what Corbin typically describes as "the Khidr of your being" (AWA 61). Corbin, for his part, would refer with full approval to Jung's most celebrated treatment of Khidr while discussing Suhrawardi in his first-ever lecture at Eranos (EJ 17, 1949, 150-1 with n.45). The place where he himself talks most potently, as well as famously, about Khidr is AWA 32-93; on the major significance of Khidr for Ibn al -- 'Arabi see now C. Addas, Quest for the red sulphur (Cambridge 1993). To Corbin, it will be noted, the infinitely elusive and intimate experience of encountering Khidr is inseparable from the inner experience of monos pros monon or "the alone to the alone" (AWA 6). That Corbin was influenced by Louis Massignon's empathy for Khidr, and especially by Massignon's extraordinary paper on Khidr and Elijah (in Evie le prophete, ed. C. Baudouin, Paris 1956, ii 269-90 = Opera minora, Beirut 1963, i 142-61), is beyond question (AWA 55-7 with nn.18, 21). On the other hand, H.T. Hakl's suggestion (Eranos, Sheffield 2013, 120) that Jung was indebted to Massignon not only for much of what he knew about Islam in general but also for much of his knowledge about Khidr is chronologically impossible and more than a little wide of the mark. "3 For the intensity of Corbin's involvement with Joachim of Fiore see e.g. EIT i 167-70, iii 197-8, iv 443-9; L'homme et son ange (Paris 1983) 196-200, 231, 240; also his emphasis at AE 40 on Joachim's "primordial significance" for the history of western spirituality. With regard to the remarkable idea of "a true instead of a fantastical imagination", vera imaginatio et non phantastica: Carl Jung cites as his main source for this notion the Rosarium philosophorum (Frankfurt 1550, 12 = Artis auriferae volumen secundum, Basle 1593, 215; PA 167 §§218-19, 252 §355, 257 §360 with n.36, 276 §393). But compare also ibid. 250 §350, where he quotes another alchemical statement 746 FOUR : CATAFALQUE that ordinary people are completely blind to what "the eyes of the intellect and of the imagination are able to perceive through true, through truest, vision" (€& vulgarium hominum oculi ista non vident, sed ocult intellectus <P imaginationis percipiunt, visu vero, verissimo: Musaeum hermeticum, Frankfurt 1678, 574). For Jung these statements offered the most perfect confirmation, from alchemy, of the initiatory teaching he had been given by his inner teacher Philemon: the teaching that the psyche, together with everything inside it, is real. See especially MDR 176/183; SE 665 §1505 and 775 §1740, and his personal account of the terror he experienced when encountering this reality for the first time, just like some man who entered his workshop "and found all the tools flying about doing things independently of his will" (7/P 28). "The real is what works": TE 217 §353. For this "reality" of imagination, or true fantasy, see also Jung's letter to Kurt Plachte dated 10 January 1929 in which he describes creative imagination as the only primordial reality which is immediately available to us (JZ i 60); R. Bernardini, Jung a Eranos (Milan 2011) 138; and compare P. Bishop, Analytical psychology and German classical aesthetics i (Hove 2008) 111-16, who unfortunately omits any reference to Hermetic tradition. Very significantly Henry Corbin refers straight to Jung's discussion of imaginatio vera when touching on the subject during his first appearance at Eranos (EJ 17, 1949, 146 with n.33, 148 with n.39), just as he will continue to do later on (e.g. SB 11 with 274 n.24); his extremely casual use of the expression when writing, only a few weeks after the gathering, to the organizer of Eranos also shows how familiar it must have been at the time in Jung's immediate circle (letter to Olga Frobe -- Kapteyn dated 10 October 1949, FC; AJ 165). Needless to say, this idea of "true imagination" or the "imaginal" was to become a fundamental concern for Corbin throughout the rest of his NOTES TO PAGE 386 747 life: note the urgency of the comments he wrote just a few months before he died (SB ix -- xii, xviii). And it's impossible to overstate the importance of the fact (well understood by Bernardini 139) that, whatever may have been done by later Jungians to muddy the waters, on this central point Jung and Corbin were in full agreement. Hopefully there is no need to say too much about the continuity of the thread running all the way from Jung's dramatic initiation into the mysteries of "true imagination" by Philemon, father of prophets, right through to Corbin's constant reminder that the forgotten faculty of true imagination is the property of prophets. As far as Philemon is concerned: it can be helpful to note how exactly the ambiguity of his status as not only a prophet but also "the father of prophets" is reflected in the ambiguous situation of Khidr, who not only is a prophet but also has a unique status and "charisma superior to that of the prophets" (SB 314 n.25, cf. EIT i 250 n.233, iii 25). And regarding Corbin's awareness of the essential link between imaginatio vera and prophecy, see for instance Nouvelles de l'Institut catholique de Paris (February 1977) 189-91 = L''Tran et la philosophie (Paris 1990) 135-9 (cf. Temenos Academy review 8, 1987, 229-32: "... the Imaginatio vera of the visionary contemplatives in the true sense of the word ... all the visions of the prophets ..."); SB ix -- xiii. But the crucial point to remember here is that this connection between imagination and prophecy, which can seem so bizarre to us, has a vibrantly meaningful history extending back in time for two thousand years. See G. O'Daly, Augustine's philosophy of mind (London 1987) 120-7; E.C. Clarke, lamblichus' 'De mysteriis (Aldershot 2001) 98 n.112; A. Sheppard, The poetics of phantasia (London 2014) 77-88, 102 and in On prophecy, dreams and human imagination, ed. D.A. Russell and H.-G. Nesselrath (Ttibingen 2014) 97-110; and compare also P. Kraus, Jabir ibn Hayyan ii (Cairo 1942) 105 ("le prophéte ... posséde ... 748 FOUR : CATAFALQUE une imagination parfaite"), a passage highlighted as specially important by Henry Corbin inside his own copy of Kraus' book which is in my possession. 'This broad historical background makes it all the more reassuring that even the occasional Jungian has been drawn to an awareness of the "prophetic capacity" inherent in what Jung described, so specifically, as true imagination (S. Salman, Spring 74, 2006, 180). 74'To cite one example of the problems Henry Corbin already encountered during his lifetime, and that only intensified after he died: the usual grandiose narratives about the Université Saint Jean de Jérusalem which, in 1974, he helped to establish as a continuation of the work already done at Eranos (so e.g. R. Bernardini, Historia religionum 5, 2013, 107-8; WJ. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the academy, Cambridge 2012, 341-3) need to be corrected and balanced by the humble fact that Stella Corbin finally had to close the entire affair down because the clash of egos among the major protagonists had become unbearable. "In matters of the spirit", as she said to me every time she went over what happened, "one does not compromise!" As for Corbin's striking diplomacy or chivalry when colleagues infuriated him and let him down, the clearest and most explicit example of his policy can be found in his correspondence with the Russian scholar Vladimir Ivanow. "Certainly there is more than one point on which we disagree ... but I made the very deliberate effort to slide over the fact so discreetly that no one, aside from you and me, would be able to notice ... I have always wished to avoid even the slightest hint or shadow of any polemic against you ... Alas, I fear that our inability to understand each other is beyond any remedy; but is it really necessary to make it public? ... Wouldn't it be better simply to agree? ... my dear Colleague ... From my side I have always adopted the same policy with your books of throwing NOTES TO PAGES 386-388 749 the spotlight on those points where you and I agree, while using the discreetest hints to skip past any point on which | take issue with you ... All the best to you, my dear Colleague and Friend" (Correspondance Corbin -- Ivanow, ed. S. Schmidtke, Paris 1999, 126-8). Corbin's closeness to the prophets towards the end of his life was mostly a matter of personal discussion between him and Stella -- but it appropriately is reflected in some of the last words he ever wrote (Cahiers de l'Université Saint Jean de Jérusalem 5, 1978, 141, 169) and also echoed in the commemorative comments made by the friend he instructed to take care of ceremonies for his funeral ("Au sens le plus authentique de ce verbe, il 'prophétisait' ..."": R. Stauffer, ibid. 10; H.T. Hakl, Evanos, Sheffield 2013, 163). 25 For Jung and Corbin as the two "immediate fathers" of James Hillman's psychology see in particular his Archetypal psychology (Dallas 1983) 2-3, where of course he mentions nothing of what actually happened. After the explosive episode in Paris which Stella Corbin remembered so clearly, her husband not only followed his normal operating procedure of treating Hillman as his dear colleague and friend (e.g. HC 49). Apotropaically he also went to the extent of inventing points of consensus where no real agreement existed, describing the metaphysical existence of the Persian Sufis' "imaginal world" as "my great meeting-point with our dear James Hillman' -- even though, just one month later, he would warn that Hillman along with other Jungians hadn't understood this metaphysical reality at all (letter from Corbin to David Miller dated 9 February 1978, FC; cf. D.L. Miller, The new polytheism, 2" ed., Dallas 1981, 4). And, interestingly, a similar sequence of events unfolded in Corbin's relationship with David Miller. Miller related to me during a long conversation in April 2014 how Corbin exploded into a furious outburst at their first encounter 750 FOUR : CATAFALQUE because of a lecture Miller had just given about polytheism, with Corbin shouting that Miller didn't have a clue what he was saying. From then on, every year they met at Eranos, the Corbins were extra nice towards him and made sure to have a meal with him. But, as Miller himself agreed with me, even the famous congratulatory letter that Corbin wrote to him in February 1978 (reproduced at Miller's New polytheism 1 -- 6, although Stella Corbin made sure to prevent him from publishing one paragraph which is vital for understanding the letter as a whole) has nothing straightforward or obvious about it. He pretends to agree with Miller about polytheism while, in fact, leading him on far beyond the positions with which Corbin is claiming to agree. Using a standard Sufi ruse, or teacher's trick, he appears to praise the pupil whereas all the time he is pointing straight past the pupil's concepts to something quite different. It's only too easy to see in the language of this letter Corbin's wholehearted "approbation" of Miller, or James Hillman (G. Shaw, Dionysius 21, 2003, 78 n.12), except that here too nothing is what it seems. Even the way in which Corbin dismisses the profanity and "frivolity" of Renaissance art (New polytheism 3) is, not only subtly but also obviously, a coded criticism of Hillman's whole approach. 26 Aside from the pressing need Stella Corbin felt to describe what happened at her and her husband's Paris home, she also told me with the greatest intensity and suffering that the words he would go on to publish in March of 1978 just a few months before his death were aimed directly at Hillman even though for the sake of discretion he avoided mentioning Hillman by name. These were Corbin's words of solemn "warning" about the "great danger" of misusing the word "imaginal" and abusing the realities of true imagination by tearing them away from their mystical context as preserved in Sufi teaching NOTES TO PAGES 388-389 751 (Corps spirituel et terre céleste, 2" ed., Paris 1979, 18; cf. SB xviii- xix). But that was more than enough to trouble a number of people. The popular American literary expert Harold Bloom, famous for his view that the whole of literature is nothing but a "weak" or "strong" misreading of older authors, confessed to his uneasiness at hearing a great man like Henry Corbin issuing such generic warnings (AWA xvi). And Tom Cheetham, after I relayed to him that Corbin had his sights set on James Hillman, decided to offer a public retelling of the "story" so he could point out how unacceptably rigid and old-fashioned Corbin was in getting "upset" with Hillman or bothering to issue any such warning (Imaginal love, Thompson, CT 2015, 23-31, 186-95). Even so, Hillman is still much better known for disregarding the warnings of that other "father" he found in Carl Jung; and there is more than a little truth in the argument that he only wanted fathers he could kill through a good old- fashioned patricide (D. Tacey, JAP 59, 2014, 472; for Hillman's admittedly "schizoid" relationship to Jung see D. Russell, The life and ideas of James Hillman i, New York 2013, 386-7). Jung himself had warned very solemnly that his psychology, and in particular the method of active imagination, "is not a plaything for children" (SD 68: "almost like a label on a modern-day consumer product", as noted by J.C. Miller, The transcendent function, Albany 2004, 13). But Hillman, as eternal child or puer, was determined to the end to make a plaything of them -- always misunderstanding both Jung's and Corbin's simple warning that the only true puer aeternus is not the child who wants to remain a child but the young boy who has been born directly "from the maturity of the adult man" (PR 457 §742; Revue de culture européenne 5, 1953, 33 = HJ 282; C.G. Jung, Réponse 4 Job, Paris 1964, 251 = AJ 152). On Zoroastrian prophecies relating to disrespect for elders and contempt for their warnings, see e.g. Zand-i vohiiman yasn 4.13-15 (ed. B.T. 752 FOUR : CATAFALQUE Anklesaria, Bombay 1957, 20-1, 107); F. Cumont, Revue de l' histoire des religions 103 (1931) 81 with J. Bidez and Cumont, Les mages hellénisés (Paris 1938) i 215-22, ii 370-3. In Jewish tradition compare especially Isaiah 3:4 -- 5 and, for the same theme in ancient Greece and Rome, Hesiod, Works and days 182-201; The conftict of generations in ancient Greece and Rome, ed. S. Bertman (Amsterdam 1976); J. Bremmer, Zeitschrift far Papyrologie und Epigraphik 39 (1980) 31. 7 kor Corbin's earlier encounters with Jungians see HC 48-9, where he makes it very clear that his need to differentiate between his work and Jung's was provoked to a large extent by the collective pressure from Jungians to make him one of their own. This is also where he significantly describes how, during the intimate discussions he and Jung held together, Jung in effect washed his hands of the so-called Jungians and their unconscious behaviour (ibid. 48). "With all the consequences this entails": JZ ii 77 = Jung on Christianity, ed. M. Stein (Princeton 1999) 170. 28 For Corbin's heartfelt feelings of fondness, love and gratitude towards Jung see e.g. the letter he wrote to Olga Frobe- Kapteyn dated 4 January 1950 (FC, AJ 165, R. Bernardini, Historia religionum 5, 2013, 101); Du 15/4 (April 1955) 29 = HC 262; his letter to Frobe -- Kapteyn dated 11 June 1961 (FC, Bernardini 107); C.G. Jung, Réponse a Job (Paris 1964) 255 = Aj 155. But one plain sign of how tired he had become of the whole Jung business towards the end of his life, and how jarred his sensibilities had become due to the constant abuse of his term "imaginal" by Hillman in particular, is the complaint Corbin made just before dying that Jungian psychologists are totally incapable of distinguishing as needed between the true visionary nature of the imaginal and the NOTES TO PAGE 389 753 worthless self-indulgence of the imaginary (HC 49, repeated for example by C. Jambet, La logique des Orientaux, Paris 1983, 40-4). The great irony here is that the person who, with his rediscovery of the fundamental difference between true and false imagination, gave the most powerful impetus to Corbin's own distinction between the imaginal and the imaginary was none other than Carl Jung. Corbin himself had for years been perfectly well aware of this (see e.g. EJ 17, 1949, 146 with n.33, 148 with n.39; ARV iii 74 n.48; SB 11 with 274 n.24) -- although it has become only too easy, thanks to the directions in which Jungian psychology ended up forging ahead, to forget that "in actual fact both Jung and Corbin distinguished between a 'genuine' form of imagination and an 'illusory' form" (Bernardini, Jung a Eranos, Milan 2011, 139). And just how close Jung and Corbin were to each other in their inner understanding of this matter can be shown by simply taking one from a number of different possible examples. So, for instance, nothing might sound more alien to Carl Jung's own interests or style than the emphasis placed by Henry Corbin on the traditional idea that only through linking up with the pure consciousness known to ancient Greeks as nous can imaginatio vera or true imagination offer full access to the prophetic realities (Nouvelles de l'Institut catholique de Paris, February 1977, 189-91 = L'Iran et la philosophie, Paris 1990, 135-9). But while Corbin was busy reading his Persian texts, Jung was busy reading ancient Greek texts; and that includes the extremely difficult text of Iamblichus' On the mysteries. In fact he was able to read parts of it in the original Greek, which is something very few people nowadays are even remotely capable of, and there was one specific passage that caught his attention. He carefully bookmarked the place where lamblichus touches on the subject of ordinary human fantasy or imagination only to add that "none of this fantasizing is aroused when the life of 754 FOUR : CATAFALQUE consciousness inside us is fully activated" (phantasia d' oudemia egeiretai tés noeras z6és teleiés energousés: De mysteriis 10.2). At the top of his paper bookmark, plainly inserted to remind him of this particular paragraph where lamblichus is distinguishing between the normal human faculty of imagination and the state of pure consciousness or nous that exists far beyond it, Jung wrote the two words imaginatio vera. And he also slipped another bookmark further on into the same volume, at a point where the English editor has added a few words of explanatory commentary on this same passage: "The rites of initiation culminate in a vision of 'great things' (i.e. of gods and things divine). Porphyry has suggested that the things which men see in such visions are not realities, but are merely phantasms produced by their own imagination. Abammon denies this. In the men who see these visions, it is not phantasia or ordinary imagination, he says, but mous or pure consciousness, that is at work; and mous does not produce phantasms, but apprehends 'the realities that truly are'." The first bookmark was placed by Jung in his own copy of Walter Scott's Hermetica (iv, Oxford 1936) at pages 36-7 (I am very grateful to Vreni Jung for confirming that the two words at the top of it are indeed in Carl Jung's handwriting); the second was inserted at pages 88-9. Gregory Shaw's comments (Dionysius 21, 2003, 75-6) on the almost identical dichotomies between true and false imagination as presented both by Iamblichus and by Jungian psychology need some significant updating in light of the fact that Jung himself was, not just probably but demonstrably, reading Iamblichus. > On Corbin's persistent defence of Jung in the face of Nasr's provocations, see Nasr himself: Temenos Academy review 2 (1999) 38 = Esotérisme, gnoses et imaginaire symbolique, ed. R. Caron, J. Godwin, WJ. Hanegraaff and J.-L. Vieillard -- Baron NOTES TO PAGES 389-390 755 (Leuven 2001) 788; also The philosophy of Seyyed Hossein Nasr, ed. L.E. Hahn, R.E. Auxier and L.W. Stone (Chicago 2001) 50. This isn't to say that, in the inevitable give-and-take, Nasr was above presenting himself as the injured party Un search of the sacred, Santa Barbara 2010, 92-3): on Corbin's own tendency to be just as provocative, in conversation, as his tone was mild in his published works see the personal letter from Stella Corbin to David Miller dated 2 June 1980 (FC: "Dans la conversation, Henry aimait parfois provoquer, jamais dans un livre"). For the constant onslaught of "Traditionalists" against Jung's psychology see e.g. René Guénon, Symbols of sacred science (Hillsdale NY 2004) 38-42 ("... 'inverse spirituality' ... 'reign of the Antichrist' ...") and Le théosophisme (2 ed., Paris 1965) 425-6 with J. Biés in René Guénon, ed. J -- P. Laurant and P. Barbanegra (Paris 1985) 38 and X. Accart, Politica hermetica 16 (2002) 187; Julius Evola in Sezession 11 (October 2005) 5; Titus Burckhardt, Mirror of the intellect (Cambridge 1987) 45-67, Frithjof Schuon, ibid. 66-7 n.64 ("... the almost universal refusal of people to see the devil and to call him by his name ...); Martin Lings in The underlying religion, ed. Lings and C. Minnaar (Bloomington, IN 2007) 113 n.7; Whitall Perry, The widening breach (Cambridge 1995) and Challenges to a secular society (Oakton, VA 1996); Philip Sherrard, Studies in comparative religion 3/1 (Winter 1969) 33-49; Wolfgang Smith, Cosmos and transcendence (2TM ed., San Rafael 2008); Jacob Needleman, A sense of the cosmos (Garden City, NY 1975); Harry Oldmeadow, Journeys east (Bloomington, IN 2004); Charles Upton, The science of the greater jihad (San Rafael 2011) with Samuel Bendeck Sotillos, Sacred web 33 (Summer 2014) 181-3; Psychology and the perennial philosophy, ed. Bendeck Sotillos (Bloomington, IN 2013). The general level of sustained incomprehension fuelling these criticisms is well captured by Seyyed Hossein Nasr's mocking dismissal of Jungian psychol- 756 FOUR : CATAFALQUE ogy as a "dead end" due to "the limitations of the ultimately agnostic views of Jung" (Nasr and R. Jahanbegloo, In search of the sacred, Santa Barbara 2010, 196). But it probably is worth offering one very characteristic example of the wilful twisting or skewing which is needed to create, then maintain, this collective and psychologically quite fascinating demonization of Jung. Recently he has been attacked, in the name of the Traditionalist cause, for claiming that the "concept of the 'transcendent'" is completely relative and points to nothing real beyond it (Bendeck Sotillos, Sacred web 31, Summer 2013, 147 n.7). One only has to look at the passage this author is citing, though, to see how crudely he has misquoted and distorted what Jung himself was saying -- which is not that the philosophical "concept of the "transcendent" corresponds to no reality but that the concept "transcendent", as bandied around by people so happily, has no real meaning because they don't have a clue what they are talking about. And if one cares to read on in the same passage and see what Jung himself continues to say, nothing could be clearer than that he is not denying the existence of a transcendent reality. He is just pointing out the foolishness of people who get dangerously inflated by their fanatical absolutism because in the absence of any direct experience they turn their hollow beliefs, like many Traditionalists, into assertions of absolute truth so they can fill the emptiness they feel inside (JZ ii 378-9). As for the author who is so bent on making Jung say what he didn't say: the only thing traditional about this Traditionalist is his adherence to the time-honoured ways of early Christian authorities who disposed of their enemies by twisting whatever they said, misleadingly inserting words of their own into passages they pretended to be quoting, then abruptly cutting off their opponents' statements to deprive them of their proper context (A. Busine, Paroles d-Apollon, Leiden 2005, 341-9; cf. e.g. NOTES TO PAGE 390 757 C.D. Stanley, Paul and the language of scripture, Cambridge 1992, 337). The truth is that Jung in his published writings often refers to the existence of a transcendent reality, only questioning our ability as fallible humans to access it or the ability of scientists to know it: see for example PR 363 §558, MDR 323-4/351-3, JL ii 352 and 368, also the unpublished letter from Jung to R.E.C. Hull dated 23 February 1954 (Library of Congress), plus his comments at PR 275 §417 on the crucial need to keep the transcendent reality a mystery even from oneself so as to stop the human intellect getting inflated by greedily grabbing hold of what doesn't belong to it. And note in particular the striking example of an Englishman who towards the end of Jung's life sent him a text he had written on alchemy that opens by quoting some words from Henry Corbin about the need for an "explosion" of all earthly limitations, even including one's human hopes, into a "transcendence" where every human limit is abolished. Jung's reply was equally affirmative and direct: "The fact is that the figures behind the epistemological curtain, i.e. the archetypes, are 'impossible' unions of opposites, transcendental beings ... the coniunctio is an essentially transcendental, i.e. archetypal process ... because it belongs inevitably to the transcendental, archetypal reality" (J. Trinick, The fire-tried stone, Marazion 1967, 13, 10, cf. JZ ii 394-5; this correspondence between Trinick and Jung should be enough by itself to put paid to the gratuitous claim that Jung's views on transcendence were not only hopelessly confused but also diametrically opposed to Corbin's: see the profoundly confused account by T. Cheetham, All the world an icon, Berkeley 2012, 142-5). As a matter of fact, he even states that to deprive people of any transcendent reality is psychologically to destroy them (M/DR 301/326). And, if one searches carefully, it's possible to find Jung describing his own experiences of such a transcendent reality. See the draft 758 FOUR : CATAFALQUE letter from Cary de Angulo to Jung dated 28 January 1924 (CBA) which records their shared experiences of the Master who transcends the universe: this passage also has to be set alongside their discussions about the absolute need to disidentify from the Master by leaving him free, completely uncaged, which she had noted down two days earlier in her draft letter dated 26 January (CBA; RB 213b). But most significant of all is Jung's account of what happened to him with the writing and completion of his last major work, Mysterium coniunctionis. In finishing it, he explains, he also acquitted himself of the task he had been born to perform by finally placing the whole of his work on its true foundation. And in that moment he arrived at the furthest boundaries of existence, coming face to face with the transcendent reality about which no statements can possibly ever be made (JP 233, subtly rationalized in MDR 210-11/221; at JJ 5/3, 2011, 70 Lionel Corbett acknowledges that "in Jung's later work" he "does, in fact, introduce a transcendent level to his theorizing", but fails to note the essential point that such "theorizing" was based on Jung's own experiences). This statement by Jung about his final book, and about at last arriving at the transcendent, needs to be placed side by side with what he says in the closing pages of the book itself. Right at the end of Mysterium coniunctionis he arrives, appropriately enough, at the theme of transcendent reality: after all, what he wrote is what he experienced because what he experienced is what he wrote. And the last ten pages can more or less be summed up in the following quotation. "The existence of a transcendental reality is, indeed, self-evident ... [hat the world inside and outside us rests on a transcendental background is as certain as our own existence; but it is equally certain that the accuracy of our direct conception of the archetypal world inside us is just as questionable as the accuracy of the way we view the physical NOTES TO PAGE 390 759 world outside us. If we are convinced we know the ultimate truth about metaphysical things, this means nothing more than that archetypal images have taken possession of our powers of thought and feeling ... The object about which we claim to have an opinion then becomes absolute and indisputable and surrounds itself with such an emotional taboo that anyone who dares reflect on it is automatically branded a heretic and blasphemer ..." (Mysterium coniunctionis ii, Zurich 1956, 324-34 §§431-44, especially 332 §442; cf. MC 544-53 §§776-89, esp. 551-2 §787). Jung goes straight on to illustrate this paradoxical reality of possession by the very same transcendent reality one is attempting to talk about: what he means by it is irrational "possession" in the strongest possible sense. In effect he is vividly describing all the symptoms of mental, as well as emotional, inflation from which Traditionalists have been suffering; and it's interesting to see how, by continuing to engage in their attacks on Jung, they are not only entering a one-sided debate. They are also walking right into the trap life has laid for them. To appreciate just what Jung means when he refers to the unconscious state of possession by the transcen- dent, all we have to do is read to the end of this same author's assault on Jung where he announces that of course there are "absolute criteria by which we can know the Supreme Reality with all certitude as the saints and sages of the plenary revelations have, such as Shankara, Ibn 'Arabi and Meister Eckhart" (Sacred web 31, 2013, 147 n.7, compare the even more grandiose statements about Meister Eckhart, Ibn al -- Arabi and Shankara by C. Upton, Vectors of the counter-initiation, San Rafael 2012, 56). In other words, by sitting at home and thinking the right thoughts we can delude ourselves that we "know" the supreme reality just as well as the greatest mystics who ever lived even though such a reality is totally beyond the grasp of our human intellects. Of course the only real question 760 FOUR : CATAFALQUE is whether it's wiser to trust those who merrily write about what they haven't experienced and would die of shock if they happened to come face to face with it; or someone who, by digging down through his whole life as deep as possible into himself, finally arrived at the transcendent reality beyond himself. *° For the ancient Platonic attacks on Gnostics see especially Plotinus, Enneads 2.9, Porphyry's Life of Plotinus 16 and On abstinence from living things 1.42, with e.g. J. Bernays, Theophrastos' Schrift 'Uber Frémmighkeit' (Berlin 1866) 14-16, 143-5; H.-C. Puech in Les sources de Plotin (Entretiens Hardt; Vandcevres 1960) 161-90; J. Zandee, The terminology of Plotinus and of some Gnostic writings, mainly the fourth treatise of the Jung codex (Istanbul 1961); V. Cilento, Paideia antignostica (Florence 1971); C. Elsas, Neuplatonische und gnostische Weltablehnung in der Schule Plotins (Berlin 1975), Z. Mazur in History of Platonism, ed. R. Berchman and J. Finamore (New Orleans 2005) 95-112; Gnosticism, Platonism and the late ancient world, ed. K. Corrigan and T. Rasimus (Leiden 2013). On the rebirth of this invective against Gnosticism in modern times cf. Arthur Versluis, The esoteric origins of the American renaissance (New York 2001) 79-80; but to see how uncannily these archetypal conflicts reincarnate one only has to compare Titus Burckhardt's onslaught on Jung in his Mirror of the intellect (Cambridge 1987, 45-67) with Plotinus' onslaught on the Gnostics in Enneads 2.9. Just like Traditionalists nowadays, the Platonists of almost two thousand years ago claimed privileged access to an ancient or primordial tradition (Plotinus, Enneads 2.9.6; Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 16): a claim that, just as in the case of modern Traditionalism, is based on a total illusion. In fact it was the Gnostics who paradoxically had far greater access to what could be called a primordial or ancient tradition NOTES TO PAGE 390 761 than most Platonic thinkers (ENM 342 n.12, cf. ibid. 342 -- 51, 382-6, 387 n.129, 398; Reality 198-9, 324, 375, 383, 417, 442-3, 552-3), and for the illusoriness of Platonists' general historical understanding see e.g. APMM 38-40, 302. Similarly the greatest hallmark of the Traditionalists, which has become their constant appeal to what they refer to as "intellect", is just one among many examples of how unprimordial their theories are. Henry Corbin strongly criticized them, from a Sufi point of view, for elevating this single term to a position of such isolated importance (Revue de métaphysique et de morale 68, 1963, 235-6, cf. Histoire de la philosophie islamique, 2TM ed., Paris 1986, 86-9); but from a western perspective its distance from any genuinely ancient or primordial tradition is even more striking. The notion of "intellect", Latin intellectus, derives above all from the world of medieval scholastic philosophy which just so happens to be the intellectual environment where contemporary Traditionalist thought is most at home. And in that world it had already become no more than a dim, pathetically distorted reflection of the Greek word nous -- which originally meant not "intellect" but consciousness, immediate perception, the purest awareness, the organ of direct and lived experience (see Reality 77-82 with the further references in SW 124). It was this tortuous egoic process, which led via Plato and Aristotle from consciousness to all our notions of intellect, that ended up creating "one of the greatest absurdities, and tragedies, in the history of western culture" (ibid. 124, cf. 53- 5); and the modern Traditionalist school, far from representing anything even close to primordial, is simply another small part of that tragic absurdity. Needless to say, the psychological paradox which comes into play as soon as people start over- emphasizing what they imagine the intellect to be is that they usually find themselves getting up to the strangest and bizarrest of tricks: on Frithjof Schuon as divine Avatar, quite unmoored, 762 FOUR !: CATAFALQUE playing the role for his disciples of primordially naked Native American see M. Sedgwick, Against the modern world (New York 2004) 9, 170-7. For the Face of God in the Qur'an see especially 28:88 ("Everything will perish except His Face") and 55:26 -- 7 ("Everyone on earth perishes; all that remains is the Face of your Lord"). *! Although Henry Corbin's relationship to the so-called Traditionalist school and to René Guénon in particular has been described as "complex" (WJ. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the academy, Cambridge 2012, 301 n.155), that complexity is largely an illusion. While still a young man in his early twenties he published, under a pseudonym, some brief but enthusiastic comments about Guénon's work. It will be noted, though, that even here he prefaced his positive assessment with strong reservations alongside some equally strong warnings against the perils of dogmatism (Trong-Ni, Tribune indochinoise, 15 August 1927, 4). But the situation changed radically after Guénon wrote a savage review of Corbin's first book on Suhrawardi, denouncing him as a gullible academic who failed to realize that Suhrawardi was just a philosophical thinker and not a genuine Sufi (Erudes traditionnelles 258, March 1947, 92; compare Martin Lings' later suspicions regarding Suhrawardi and concerns over his orthodoxy, ibid. 387, January -- February 1965, 45-6). In other words, it was the symbolic re-enactment of Suhrawardi's trial and execution all over again. From this point onwards, Corbin's silence about the supposedly "esoteric" work of Guénon spoke volumes; but when he did choose to speak about Guénon in private, or write about him confidentially, or on one occasion publicly address the issue of Guénon's work after being provoked, his criticisms of its rigid "dogmatism" and "systematic rationalism" and "intellectualizing of the spiritual quest" were damning. NOTES TO PAGES 390-391 763 See Revue de métaphysique et de morale 68 (1963) 234-7, where Corbin replies in print to the Traditionalist attack by Muhammad Askari (cf. ibid. 5-6); Frédérick Tristan's report of his conversation with Corbin in June 1976 (René Guénon, ed. P-M. Sigaud, Lausanne 1984, 205-6); the unpublished letter from Corbin to Richard Pickrell dated 28 September 1976 (FC); D. Bisson, René Guénon (Paris 2013) 403-6; D. Proulx in Os trabalhos da imaginagao: abordagens teéricas e modelizagées, ed. J -- J. Wunenburger, A.F. Aratijo and R. de Almeida (Joao Pessoa 2018). And here one also needs to consider Corbin's warnings "against the illusory pretensions" of those intellectuals who allow themselves to get inflated with "an overweening and absurd spiritual pride" (AWA 131; X. Accart, Politica hermetica 16, 2002, 194). To be sure, there was a time when he would feel glad to find in Frithjof Schuon someone willing to take a stand against the evolutionary popularism of Teilhard de Chardin (EIT iv 121 with n.154: cf. S.H. Nasr and R. Jahanbegloo, In search of the sacred, Santa Barbara 2010, 92-3); but to pretend that Corbin was ever tempted to side with the Traditionalists in attacking Carl Jung (as proposed by Ali Lakhani, Sacred web 23, Summer 2009, 162-3) means having to rely on the most hopelessly unreliable of sources combined, if one happens to be a Traditionalist, with sheer wishful thinking. "Really hit the roof" is Jung's expression, colourful but altogether appropriate where the Traditionalists are concerned, for what happened according to the Qur'an when a very stuffy and self- righteous Moses came face to face with Khidr: "Now Khidr is also someone who can appear in many different forms; in particular he appears as a wanderer in various places, appears all of a sudden and causes all kinds of situations. For you can imagine that good old Moses really hit the roof when Khidr played such tricks. All that approximately describes the peculiar psychological factor represented by Khidr. For 764 FOUR : CATAFALQUE obviously he is an unconscious figure that causes all kinds of frightening things, that makes you think: 'Now this goes awry, this goes all wrong,' but then it turns out to have been exactly the right thing ... All this expresses a sudden appearance from the unconscious, not understood at first, but then revealing itself as something of the highest value" (CD 451; compare John Dourley's comments on the "rage" experienced by "fundamentalist believers" when confronted with the work of Jung, JAP 47, 2002, 481). "So alien to our normal modern consciousness ... a lived experience": Corbin, La table ronde 97 (1956) 37 = L'Iran et la philosophie (Paris 1990) 235 (cf. The voyage and the messenger, Berkeley 1998, 221). "It was at Eranos that the pilgrim ... the eternal Sophia": Du 15/4 (April 1955) 29 = HC 262. For Jung on the mystery of the eternal Sophia or Sapientia see RB 155, 317 n.283; L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 24, 285-6 n.85. 2 For Corbin's text about Jung -- already planned in 1953 and completed, in its present form, by 1955 but only published in 2014 -- see AJ 21-101 together with the original manuscript and paginated typescript both titled "C.G. Jung et le bouddhisme" (FC). Right at the start of this text, Corbin determines its tone as well as its purpose by citing Jung's own words about the near-impossibility in the West of finding one's way back to the kind of "primordial experience" or Urerfahrung encountered traditionally through Tibetan teachings or Zen. Not only does the Christian Church offer no help, Jung explains, but the main reason for the Church's existence is precisely to block any such experience; on the other hand, trying to import eastern methods and techniques without any understanding of westerners' psychology is a recipe for disaster and the only real hope lies in the psychological process of individuation (Jung in D.T. Suzuki, Die grosse Befreiung, Leipzig 1939, 31-2, NOTES TO PAGES 391-392 765 cf. PR 553-4 §903; Corbin, "C.G. Jung et le bouddhisme" iii-iv, cf. AJ 23). In fact this one word Urerfahrung, primordial experience, locates with exquisite precision the real meeting- place between Corbin and Jung. For Jung it was a word that had the deepest meaning (see e.g. FP 339 §780 with P. Bishop, Carl Jung, London 2014, 16; C7'85 §173, 92 §192; PR 320-1 §§480-3, 346 §535; SM 90-7 §§141-51; ETG 196 and 278 with S.A. Hoeller, The Gnostic Jung and the 'Seven sermons to the dead', Wheaton, IL 1982, xxv). And, significantly, Corbin too was fond of embedding the German word in his own writings not only here but elsewhere (e.g. Etude préliminaire pour 'Le livre réunissant les deux sagesses' de Nasir~e Khosraw, Tehran 1953, 70; ARV iii 79 n.64; AJ 23). It should hardly need adding that Jung's preference for direct experience and immediate perception over intellectual theories and generalizations is the essential reason why Corbin aligned himself with Jung against the school of so-called Traditionalists who, like so many other dedicated "non-dualists", think they can put aside the subtle and infinitely mysterious modalities of human experiencing. See X. Accart, Politica hermetica 16 (2002) 190, 196; also A. Daniélou in René Guénon, ed. P -- M. Sigaud (Lausanne 1984) 139, 53 For Corbin as a westerner, doing his work to help in redeeming and saving the West, see e.g. HC 51 which he wrote shortly before he died: "Of course I am and I remain a westerner (in the terrestrial sense of the word), because it's as a westerner that I have perhaps been able to succeed in doing what it was given to me to succeed at." Compare also Christian Jambet's emphasis on the fact that "the journey to the East isn't an expatriation but a return, meant to shower us with a light we already possess but have forgotten ... Far from rejecting the West, its culture, its horizon, Corbin dedicated himself 766 FOUR ! CATAFALQUE instead to its salvation and preservation" (ibid. 14); Daryoush Shayegan's observation that Henry Corbin brought to bear "all the immense resources of western culture, of which he is one of the most legitimate representatives" (Mélanges offerts a Henry Corbin, ed. S.H. Nasr, Tehran 1977, 29-30); Xavier Accart's clear contrast between René Guénon, who considered himself an "easterner" free from any debts or connections to the West, and Henry Corbin who considered himself the opposite in every respect (Politica hermetica 16, 2002, 178 n.7, 180, 199) together with David Bisson's further comments, René Guénon (Paris 2013) 402; and Daniel Proulx's account of how for Corbin, as opposed to Guénon, "it was a question of presenting Iranian spirituality as a model which will allow the West to rediscover in its own roots the traces of the great spiritual and mystical traditions" (Os trabalhos da imaginagdo: abordagens tedricas e modelizagées, ed. J.J. Wunenburger, A.F. Araujo and R. de Almeida, Joao Pessoa 2018). As usual, with his claim that Corbin "declared war on us" because "he declared war on the West", the American scholar Steven Wasserstrom shows himself tragically clueless about what matters most (Religion after religion, Princeton 1999, 156). 34 For Corbin on Jung's psychology -- his "exegesis of the soul" -- as the arrival of dawn, the inner East inside us, and his direct comparison of Suhrawardi see "C.G. Jung et le bouddhisme" 88-9 (FC) = AJ 90-1. When he states here that "To wish to reject the premises of our own culture, and assimilate the East through a purely literal exegesis, would be the surest way of causing yet another uprooting of consciousness" he is simply quoting, as he himself acknowledges, Jung's own solemn words of warning (The secret of the golden flower, London 1931, 128, cf. AS 49 §72); for the gobbling of foreign fruits compare RB | 231b. It should always be remembered that although Corbin NOTES TO PAGES 392-394 767 distinguished himself as a metaphysician or philosopher from Jung as a psychologist, and by nature was eager to free himself from what he often perceived to be the limitations of any psychology, this is far from being the only place where he made a point of emphasizing how Jung's "psychology" was first and foremost the true study or science of the soul (compare, most famously, Revue de culture européenne 5, 1953, 14-15 = HJ 267-8). Here is the basic reason, as Corbin understood but Traditionalists couldn't, why Jung knew how to talk alongside Meister Eckhart about the possibility of God being born in the human soul (The secret of the golden flower 129-30 = AS 50 §75; AJ 89-90; Sacred web 31, Summer 2013, 146-7). $5 For Corbin on descent into the darkness see especially ARV ii 184 (Avicenna and the visionary recital, London 1960, 159). "The wound is only healed by the lance that made it": Question de 1/4 (1973) 107; in this piece, which he appropriately titled "Pour une nouvelle chevalerie", Corbin is quoting from the final act of Richard Wagner's Parsifa/ ("Nur eine Waffe taugt: die Wunde schliefSt der Speer nur, der sie schlug"). See further EJ i 9, "There is a mysterious law: "The wound is only healed by the weapon that made it'. Perhaps, if the West has secreted the poison, then the West is in a position to secrete the antidote. But it's far from clear that, as of yet, it has become aware of this responsibility"; Corbin's Philosophie iranienne et philosophie comparée (Paris 1985) 47, "There has been deception and trickery. The science that was meant to free us has created an instrument of death. But it's my conviction that this despair carries inside itself the redemption of the West. Only what secretes the poison can secrete the remedy. "Ihe wound is only healed by the weapon that made it'", X. Accart, Politica hermetica 16 (2002) 199, "And so" for Corbin "the antidote to the crisis of civilization needs to come not from the East, as 768 FOUR : CATAFALQUE Guénon had maintained, but from the West which had caused it. This is the sense in which he had interpreted a saying from Parsifal: 'Seule guérit la blessure, la lance qui la fit"; and D. Proulx in Femme, 'erés' et philosophie, ed. E.D. Diotte Besnou, Proulx and J -- M. Counet (Louvain-la-Neuve 2016) 306-7. Jung on the mystery of the Grail and the Saoshyant who returns as saviour to heal the wound he originally caused: NZ ii 1364; for the relation of the Saoshyant figure to the Grail legends compare A. Schult, Die Weltsendung des heiligen Gral im Parzifal des Wolfram von Eschenbach (Beitingheim 1975) 20. The importance of not filling the hole: P. Kingsley, Works and conversations 22 (2011) 31-2. %6 The prophecy by Jung's soul: JP 258; this detail was judiciously omitted from the corresponding sections of his published biography (MDR 18-19/5, 184/192). A prominent Jungian analyst once confided to me in Zurich that whoever makes a career or living from Jung's work is living off the corpse of Jung: the unusual language and imagery he used were clear indicators that he was relating a visionary experience. For Jung's reaction when people announced the creation of some new training institute see e.g. J.B. Wheelwright, PP 6 (1975) 68 ("He looked as though he'd been struck by a heavy object") and JM 345 ("looked as if "he had been hit by a Mack truck'"), ibid. 344 -- 5 ("He was really very much against these societies starting at all", "hated the idea of promoting a school" and, on hearing that someone in Texas had attached Jung's name to the title of an educational centre, was naturally inclined to dismiss the whole business as "a mere advertising bluff"), and for his general objections and resistance cf. Wheelwright 67, M. Fordham, JAP 24 (1979) 280; E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 161-2; D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 819 n.36. The ordeal of manipulating him into accepting the NOTES TO PAGES 394-396 769 creation of a C.G. Jung Institute in Zurich: B. Hannah, Jung, his life and work (New York 1976) 286, 295-6; Bair 530. For "My grandfather, Carl Gustav Jung ..." see NZ 170-1: "... an institution in his name which he did not think was a good idea. He disliked institutions of any sort, and felt, 'If people want to know my work, they can read my books.' His opening words at the Institute may prove prophetic ... "My grandfather, Carl Gustav Jung ...'"", JM 345. For Jung directing people to his own books if they want to understand him see also JZ i 519, ii 574, Would sometimes go to the Institute, "but not very often": Wheelwright 68. On his policy of standing back and allowing people to make a mess of things see e.g. JZ i 518 (for his habit of not interfering with pupils); RB 316a (admiring Philemon' principle of leaving people the space they need for acting out their stupidities). 3" For Jung's clear stipulations that the C.G. Jung Institute dedicate itself professionally to in-depth research and interdisciplinary partnerships see SL 471-6 §§1129-41, P. Bishop in Jung in contexts, ed. Bishop (London 1999) 6-7; JM 345-7, M. Stein in Teaching Jung, ed. K. Bulkeley and C. Weldon (New York 2011) 65-6; J. Hillman and S. Shamdasani, Lament of the dead (New York 2013) 144. On the absurdity of a training institute because everyone's path of individuation is so unique see C.A. Meier in JM 347. Characteristic of the later, revisionist disregard for Jung's own intentions is the strikingly unreflective account by Mario Jacoby: "On April 24, 1948, there was the official inauguration to celebrate the founding of the Institute. Jung gave an address at this occasion and it is remarkable that he never mentions one of the main purposes of the Institute, namely the training of new Jungian analysts. He seems mainly interested in research and ... also announced directions, which future researches conducted by the Institute 770 FOUR : CATAFALQUE might be expected to take ... Although Jung, in his inaugural speech, had said hardly anything concerning the training of new analysts, this endeavour became the main activity of the Institute from the beginning" (Who owns Jung?, ed. A. Casement, London 2007, 138). 38 For Wolfgang Pauli as scientific patron of the C.G. Jung Institute see e.g. PB iv/I 146, 245, iv/II 74, iv/III 620, 622, 634, 647, 711, iv/IV 317, 325, 421; for his comments on the institute's betrayal of its principles, ibid. iv/III 620-2, 627-30, iv/IV 420-1 = Atom and archetype, ed. C.A. Meier (Princeton 2001) 212-17. On Pauli's horror at the institute becoming a "conveyor belt" or "assembly line" see especially his letter to Meier dated 22 July 1956: PB iv/III 621 ("Massenbetrieb ... Massenbetrieb ... Massenbetriebes") = Atom and archetype 213 ("conveyor-belt system ... assembly-line system ... assembly- line industry"). The accusation clearly made an impression on Meier because, years later, he too would use the identical imagery to describe the institute's activities ("a conveyor belt for turning out ready-made analysts", JM 347). Significantly, whereas Pauli had chosen this image of a conveyor belt to describe the mechanical treatment by Jungian therapists of their patients, Meier transferred the same image to describe the training of the Jungians themselves; Meier was quicker than Pauli to carry through with resigning from his position at the institute (PB iv/IV 317, 325, 421, JM 347 with n.138). For Pauli's view of Jungian therapists as ruining their patients' dreams see the letter that Cary Baynes wrote to Carl Jung on 9 March 1959 (CBA, cf. JM 348); she tellingly mentions this in the context of stating that, if only Pauli had been able to read the text of Jung's biography which was being prepared for publication at the time, he would have recognized it as the Book of Living Fire. NOTES TO PAGES 396-398 7/1 39 On Henry Corbin's denunciation of the Jungians for essentially undermining and destroying Jung's great discoveries with their little mechanical devices see HC 48-9 ("... pour valoriser ce que Jung fut le premier a discerner et 4 exprimer par les concepts d'Animus et Anima, bien que malheureusement usage que l'on en fit ensuite ressemblat un peu trop 4 celui d'un petit appareil automatique que l'on applique, vaille que vaille, 4 n'importe quel cas"). There is a very obvious resonance between Corbin's comments here and Wolfgang Pauli's constant complaints about how the discoveries made by Jung had, in complete violation of Jung's own wishes as well as his example, degenerated at the hands of Jungians into dogmatic clichés (PB iv/TI 75, 78, cf. 196) and almost meaningless trivialities (iv/IIT 673, cf. 375). Alongside his biting criticism of the Jungians, Corbin also makes a special point of emphasizing the full extent to which Jung himself in private "forcefully and humorously denied that he was a 'Jungian'" (HC 48). Compare Alan Watts' reminiscence -- Jung "was careful to explain that he himself was not a Jungian and that he had had no intention of promulgating a particular system of psychotherapy. He had simply followed his intuition and written down his findings as they came along" (In my own way, New York 1972, 338) -- as well as Laurens van der Post's: "Above all, he had a profound horror of 'isms', and the adjective 'Jungian', which could so easily be a doorstep to 'Jungianism', was ruled out in his own discipline of psychology. "I do not want anybody to be a Jungian', he told me. 'I want people above all to be themselves" (Jung and the story of our time, New York 1975, 4; for the same sentiment of wanting to discourage people from becoming Jungians cf. JL i 405). "° For Jung's story about the old man meditating in a cave who used to draw on its walls with a piece of red chalk until his 772 FOUR : CATAFALQUE greedy disciples "all imitated the diagrams" and "in so doing they turned the whole process upside down", see ACU 129-30 §233. For his strongly worded regret about "so many pupils of mine who have fabricated all sorts of garbage out of what they took from me" see JB ii 143-4 (cf. JZ i 518); note also his quickness, especially towards the end of his life, to denounce his pupils for their laziness in failing to come to grips with the depths of the unconscious (JZ ii 626); and compare P.J. Stern's equally depreciative comments about the chief students of Jung who "not only disseminated his ideas, but distorted them in the process. Not content to act as his mouthpiece, they used the mantle of his authority to smuggle their own shallow ideas into the public arena" (C.G. Jung: the haunted prophet, New York 1976, 247) as well as H. Ellenberger's earlier remarks about the absurdly tragic contrast between the profundity and subtlety of Jung's own ideas and the over-simplifications published by "certain of his pupils" (L'évolution psychiatrique 17, 1952, 154). On Jung's grim realization "that those who mouth my name basically don't have a clue what it's all about" see JB 111 279 (JZ ii 530); certain members of his family who, to my surprise, knew these words by heart have emphasized to me that he was referring not to outsiders but to the most orthodox or mainstream Jungians. "The Jungian gang": see C.A. Meier in JM 347. Jungians as neither better nor wiser than ordinary people: JK 157; and on the perception of just how little it took to turn Jungians into monsters see e.g. S. Shamdasani, Cu/t fictions (London 1998) 80 n.7. '1 General knowledge of the famous statement "Thank God Iam Jung and not a Jungian" goes back to Barbara Hannah's report that he happened to say it "once in exasperation" (Jung, his life and work, New York 1976, 78). The various elaborations and interpretations of this damning comment read as a NOTES TO PAGES 398-400 773 terrifying testimony to the self-absorbed mentality of Jungians and post~Jungians alike. See e.g. J. Kroth, Psyche's exile (Austin 2010) 67 (when Jung said "Thank God I'm Jung and not a Jungian", in fact "what he meant was that the individuation process uncovers one's own essence and uniqueness") and M.V. Adams, For love of the imagination (Hove 2014) 73 ("What would Jungian Studies be without Hillman? What if Hillman had never existed? Would Jungians have had to invent him? Would Jungians have had to imagine him? Jung may have said: 'Thank God I am Jung and not a Jungian.' 1 might reverse that and say: "Thank God I am a Jungian and not Jung.' Or, I might say: "Thank God I am a Hillmanian'"). Murray Stein tries, very diplomatically, to downplay the seriousness of Jung's poor regard for Jungians by reducing it in the first instance to personal factors: "Jung's strong aversion to 'Jungians' around himself had its roots in large measure in his personal need to remain free to think as he wished and to change his mind or to set out in new directions. Any sort of fixed doctrine cobbled together from his previous writings and teachings would have hindered his own freedom to think ..." (Teaching Jung, ed. K. Bulkeley and C. Weldon, New York 2011, 65). But this is to overlook the most fundamental issues and understate the scale of the problem enormously. " On the intimate link between Jungians, "Jungianism" and the C.G. Jung Institute in Zurich see e.g. L. van der Post, Jung and the story of our time (New York 1975) 4, On the dangers of professional teaching, the best-case scenario of being able to keep the institute "afloat for a while", and the impossibility of any real truth ever being destroyed see the letter from Carl Jung to Cary Baynes dated 9 May 1949 (JM 348, giving a wrong date; CBA). "The Institute would be lucky if it did not outlive its creative uses within a generation": van der Post 774 FOUR : CATAFALQUE 4. For Jung's very explicit, and detailed, comparison of the process that led to the institutionalizing and deadening of Christ's teaching by the Christian Church with the process which would lead to the institutionalizing and deadening of his own psychology see especially CS 18-20 (spoken in 1923), And on the inevitable reduction, straight after his coming death, of its original fire and spirit to nothing but lifeless specimens see Jung's equally explicit and completely consistent forecast at JB iii 211 (mistranslated in JZ ii 469) -- a prediction made by him over thirty-five years later. "Their first disciples already had misunderstood them ... from the path of the truth": W.B. Henning, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 2 (1944) 136-7 = Selected papers (Tehran 1977) ii 142-3. '3 For the idea of needing to find an "exit" from the world of the Red book into the realms of modern science I am indebted especially to Joseph Cambray (Z//S 3, 2011, 110-24, International journal of psychoanalysis 94, 2013, 417-18 and in The Red book, ed. T. Kirsch and G. Hogenson, London 2014, 36-51). Each of Jung's books as an inner command or commission: JP 359-60, cf: MDR 211/222. "Grace ... the divine cause of my existence ... will also live for me": letter, dated 23 January 1947, from Carl Jung to Victor White regarding Barbara Robb (JW 70-1; for Jung's physical meeting with her, almost five years later, see ibid. 168-72). "* The trope of heralding Jung as pioneer "of a new aeon', of the age of Aquarius, goes back already to his immediate disciples: cf. e.g. G. Adler, PP 6 (1975) 21. The fact that, aside from copying everything he knows about the age of Aquarius from Jung, Adler distorts and completely misunderstands Jung's writings in the process (so e.g. in his comments on Jung's letter to Erich Neumann dated 5 January 1952: ibid. 20) is a little NOTES TO PAGES 400-403 775 disconcerting. For the remarks made by Jung himself about the "Christification of many" see his Answer to Job (London 1954) 180 = PR 470 §758 as well as Paul Bishop's surgically accurate commentary, Jung's Answer to Job' (Hove 2002) 161-2. With true American flair, along with disastrous consequences thanks to his influence, Edward Edinger totally neglected the small print containing Jung's accompanying warnings and crucial qualifications (PP 25, 1991, 44, The creation of consciousness, Toronto 1984, 113): of course, in such matters, people far prefer to follow Edinger rather than Jung because he is so "much easier to read" (T.B. Kirsch, The Jungians, London 2000, 71, 101). For the new trope that the Red 00k has been published during our lifetimes because only now are we humans evolved enough in consciousness to receive it, see e.g. L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 1-2, 33. The fallacy of imagining that fresh texts will, thanks to some miracle, allow one to understand authors never quite understood before is amply demonstrated by the discovery of the famous Empedocles papyrus at Strasbourg in the 1990s: the hype surrounding its publication was that at last it revealed the "real" Empedocles for the first time, and it certainly contains some wonderful new material. But, in practice, all it did was give students even more rope to hang themselves by -- offering plenty of extra Empedoclean material onto which they could project their old rationalizing points of view while extinguishing every remaining trace of Empedocles' magic (ENM 333-413). Jung's modesty in facing his idiocy: JP 80-1, MDR 207-8/217-18. Jung is forced to learn how to laugh and say yes at the prospect of total destruction: see RB 230b with V.W. Odajnyk, PP 53 (2010) 450-1 and, years later, /J]W 77-8, 81. For our god-almighty power to destroy ourselves as the only authentic or tangible manifestation of humanity's new divine status see e.g. PR 460-1 §§746-7; JW 237 = JL ii 167-8; 716 FOUR : CATAFALQUE JL ii 225; on Jung's poor opinion of those who fantasize about becoming creative little gods, NZ ii 936-7. " "New religion ... and all over the world": see Jung's response to the famous dream of Max Zeller as published in PP 6 (1975) 75, Zeller's The dream: the vision of the night (2TM* ed., Boston 1990) 2-3, J]W 109. Marie -- Louise von Franz explained the dream as meaning "there are thousands of Jungians who have never heard the name 'Jung'"" (F'R/ iii 56:42 -- 9) -- marking, with her subtle but egotistic comment, the vast inner gulf separating Jung from his closest collaborator. For Jung's own passing comments about other people in the world who perhaps are working, or being worked on, in ways similar to him but whom he doesn't know about see RB 250 n.194. "Barbarian disintegration ... God knows where" and sharing the fate of Meister Eckhart: F'RJ ii 42:46 -- 43:35 = PP 38 (1998) 39. The statement here by von Franz about Meister Eckhart being "forgotten for four hundred years" is a mistake on her part for "six hundred years": cf. CS 20, Aion 87 §143 and 194 §302, JZ ii 586. As for Jung's repeated emphasis on a delay of six hundred years, this is far from accidental and closely corresponds to the fallow periods of "incubation" between ages according to the system put forward by Joachim of Fiore (N. Cohn, The pursuit of the millennium, 2" ed., New York 1970, 109-10). With regard to Meister Eckhart in particular: it will be noted that Jung spoke about the group of people who immediately gathered around him, and proudly misinterpreted him, as creating "the open way to Hell" (C'S 20). 46 For the overwhelming darkness Jung sees ahead, cf. e.g. JL ii 136, 225-6, 229-30. One could describe much of the subsequent Jungian literature as a discreet sterilization, or bowdlerizing, of this vision; and the desperate attempt at NOTES TO PAGES 403-407 777 finding "a more hopeful side" to Jung in the occasional hint he dropped about how, contrary to our own ideals of domination, "the afternoon of humanity, in a distant future, may yet evolve a different ideal. In time, even conquest will cease to be the dream" overlooks the crucial fact that some distant future is altogether different from the immediate future we and the next few generations are faced with (W.Y. Evans -- Wentz, The Tibetan book of the great liberation, London 1954, xlix, cf. PR 493 §787; J. Dourley in Psychology and religion at the millennium and beyond, ed. J.M. Spiegelman, Tempe 1998, 33). On the future as so entirely different from the present as to be incomprehensible, and on the futility of speculating about it, see especially RB 306 with n.236; JW 222 = JL ii 137-8; JL ii 225. Regarding the idea of seeds being sown in the present for the future see e.g. JZ ii 225 together with Jung's unpublished notes on secret Gnostic teachings about the "ends of the aeons", or telé tén aiénén, at AN vii 115. This type of imagery, as well as the notion that somewhere and somehow some tiny essence always manages to survive, is deeply embedded in western traditions about the different cycles of humanity (SW 172-3). For ancient Gnostics on sowing and harvest see also Gospel according to Philip 7, 52.25-35 (Nag Hammadi codex IT, 2-7, ed. B. Layton, Leiden 1989, i 144-5 = LEvangile selon Philippe, ed. JE. Ménard, Paris 1967, 48-9, 126-7); Origen, Commentaries on the gospel according to John, ed. E. Preuschen (Leipzig 1903) 276.18-277.1, 278.33-279.8 = The fragments of Heracleon, ed. A.E. Brooke (Cambridge 1891) 87-9 §§35-6; W. Foerster, Gnosis (Oxford 1972-74) i 175-6, ii 78-9. Jung on the crucial need for a thorough knowledge of Latin and Greek if one is to have any hope of understanding western psychology: JP B31 (at Bollingen, 19 October 1958). Because we have entered the darkness which still belongs to the Christian aeon "we shall need Christian virtues fo the utmost": J]W220-2 = JL ii 136-7; 778 FOUR : CATAFALQUE and for the Christian virtues of conscious suffering or voluntary sacrifice see, aside from the Red book, Jung's testimonial in PP 6 (1975) 12. For the transitions between ages as times of particular melancholy and despair, Jung's words "now we are coming to Aquarius ... and we are standing only at the very beginning of this apocalyptic development!", plus his Latin quotation, see JB ii 463 (cf. JL ii 229). For the sake of completeness it should be noted that among supporters of the popular new-age views about a coming dawn of Aquarius, the celebratory optimism is mostly only skin-deep and little more than a distraction from their underlying fears as well as despair (W.J. Hanegraaff, New age religion and western culture, Leiden 1996, 339, 344-8, 355-6): even the most obvious founders of the new-age movement have been quick to denounce its narcissism (ibid. 358-60). The words Luciferi vires accendit Aquarius acres come at the culmination to book 5 of the Sibylline oracles, and well deserve to be read in their original context. See the Latin edition used by Jung, Siby/lina oracula, ed. Servatius Gallaeus (Amsterdam 1689) 647; for the original Greek text, ibid. with Die Oracula Sibyllina, ed. J. Geffcken (Leipzig 1902) 129; and for an English translation, The Sibylline oracles, books III-V, trans. H.N. Bate (London 1918) 118. Jung also quotes the same Latin text in Answer to Job to evoke the "dark end" to the age of Pisces "which we have still to experience, and before whose -- without exaggeration -- truly apocalyptic possibilities mankind shudders" because it threatens to "eclipse even the horrors described in the Apocalypse" (Answer to Job, London 1954, 146; cf. PR 450-1 §733). 47 "To understand, that I was unable ... continue to exist?": see the letter, dated 13 November 1960, from Jung to Eugene Rolfe published in Rolfe's Encounter with Jung (Boston 1989) 158 and reproduced ibid., plates VIJ-VIII; Jung wrote, as always NOTES TO PAGES 407-409 779 to Rolfe, in English. The disease that he refers to was a deep infection (JZ ii 620-1). For his language of understanding this or that but not seeing "the whole", compare Empedocles fr. 2.5-8 Diels = fr. 7.13-19 Gemelli Marciano; ENM 360-1 with n.62; and note, also, Cary Baynes' comments on the failure even of those closest to Jung to understand him "as a whole" (JSB 64). "8 'The voluntary responders to Jung's letter include Gerhard Adler, PP 6 (1975) 14 = Dynamics of the self (London 1979) 92: "in a short and uncharacteristic bout of depression ... Jung's words express clearly how he experienced and suffered from the incompleteness and faultiness of the world's condition. But it is just out of such realizations that the creative spirit helps to shape the character of a new generation"; Adler then goes rattling on (PP 6, 1975, 14) about the need to look not at the present but towards a vision of some better future, suffering from the exact same ailment that Jung himself had diagnosed as "the disease of our time" or as "Happy Neurosis Island, where the great thing is still ahead" to which one can eagerly keep looking forward (JV ii 759-60). For other responders compare e.g. Edward Edinger, Ego and self (Toronto 2000) 148-9 ("Jung speaks of his depression ... His spirits picked up again, but I think it is important for us lesser mortals to know that Jung had such experiences to the end", cf. PP 48, 2005, 46), L.S. Owens in A. Ribi, The search for roots (Los Angeles 2013) 1-2 and Anne Baring, The dream of the cosmos (Shaftesbury 2013) 257 ("But he did not fail. The seeds sown by him are beginning to bear fruit, not only in the branch of psychology which has taken his name but in the culture as a whole ..."). "I cannot tell you often enough that we are definitely the leaders we have been waiting for, and that we have been raised, since childhood, for this time precisely": 780 FOUR : CATAFALQUE Clarissa Pinkola Estés in A clear and present danger: narcissism in the era of President Trump, ed. L. Cruz and S. Buser (Asheville 2017) 275; there is more than a touch of irony about the way this statement is made in a book on narcissism, and more than a little tragedy about the fact that modern spirituality has become just as narcissistic as the politicians. * For the characteristically new-age sentiment that, thanks to Freud and Jung but "especially since the 1960s and the radical increase in psychological self-consciousness which that era helped mediate, ... what individuals and psychologists have long been doing has now become the collective responsibility of our culture: to make the unconscious conscious" see Richard Tarnas in The vision thing, ed. T. Singer (London 2000) 251. But Jung was adamant that the focus on "making the unconscious conscious" is a concern much more of Freud's psychology than of his own and represents only one aspect of a far more intricate process, for which few people have the time or the inclination. See JS 39-40 with K.A. Connidis in The variables of moral capacity, ed. D.C. Thomasma and D.N. Weisstub (Dordrecht 2004) 104, MC 355-9 §§ 498-505, and for his often ambiguous assessment of consciousness cf. e.g. JS 210-11 (flatly contradicting his usual account of individuation as an increase in consciousness) together with JL ii 626 (criticizing the tendency even among Jungians to overvalue the importance of making the unconscious conscious); L. Schlamm, European journal of psychotherapy and counselling 9 (2007) 411; C. Doran, TJS 8 (2016) 171-2. For the report about Jung's extended experiences before he died leading him to acknowledge that "he does not trust consciousness in the usual sense any more" see the letter, dated 10 December 1960, to James Hillman from his wife Kate: D. Russell, The Life and ideas of James Hillman i (New York 2013) 468-9. NOTES TO PAGES 409-410 781 59 Jung's statement on 13 November 1960 that he had "picked up again" was clearly a reference to his physical recovery from the infection, rather than to any psychological improvement ("I was caught by a disease ... a serious disease in my age! However I have picked up again": E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 158). In fact when he went down to Lugano later that month, he was still feeling too miserable even to see colleagues or friends (letter from Carl Jung to R.E-C. Hull dated 6 January 1961, Library of Congress; for Jung's visit to Lugano see the letterhead in Rolfe, plate IX). And as Sonu Shamdasani has noted, his depressed words and feelings during November were far from just a "passing" phenomenon "because there were a number of statements towards the end of his life of a similar sort" (PP 53, 2010, 433; cf. NZ 175, JM 351-2). For a classic example of Jung as diplomat, note his masterfully controlled behaviour towards James Kirsch even when he was feeling "at wits' end" and "could hardly touch" the letters Kirsch was sending (A. Lammers in Turbulent times, creative minas, ed. E. Shalit and M. Stein, Asheville 2016, 76-7). In general it was only too tempting to mistake what he said for what he felt: the history of Jung as trickster, and the ways in which the people around him allowed themselves to be tricked, still remains to be written. Smiling for a photograph on his last birthday: A. Jaffé, Word and image (Princeton 1979) 145, cf. NL 169, 174-5; for his last days, M. Serrano, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse (London 1966) 104. The last bottle of wine: D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 623; D. Russell, The life and ideas of James Hillman i (New York 2013) 469. For the comparison explicitly drawn by Jung between the superficiality of his worldly personality no. 1, drowning out the mysterious silence or stillness of another world, and the flamboyant gaudiness of a loud brass band blaring in some hotel lobby see MDR 204/214. But note especially the original version of his account at JP 782 FOUR : CATAFALQUE 83 -- 4 -- where he explains that the specific hotels which had given rise to this striking image were the Blackstone Hotel he had visited in Chicago, with its ostentatious sumptiousness and luxury, and the Plaza Hotel he had also visited in New York with all its showy grandeur. For Jung's unfortunate experience at the Plaza Hotel see JS 94 -- 5. For the music on offer at the Blackstone Hotel, "a venerable edifice that played host to many American presidents" and "had been a gathering place for the city's rich and famous from its opening in 1910", cf. C.A. Sengstock, That toddlin' town (Urbana 2004) 95. >! For Europe as a "rotting carcass" and the comparison with the final years of the Roman Empire, see Jung's letter to Esther Harding dated 8 July 1947 (JM 349). "The precincts of hell ... aremnant and that its days are counted": letter from Jung to Cary Baynes dated 2 November 1945 (S. Shamdasani, Quadrant 38/1, 2008, 24; CBA), and compare for example the letter he would write to Eugene Rolfe at the end of 1960 ("... the fires of Hell, which have broken through in Europe since 20 years now": E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 170 = plates [X -- X). Very significantly Jung had already expressed similar prophetic views back in 1942 while, as he put it, sitting on the edge of a volcano (JZ i 316, cf. 309): for him the image of a volcanic crater was one of the most intensely meaningful and potent symbols conceivable, because at the bottom of the crater stands "the house of the prophet" (RB 252a; cf. 247-8, 366b, [JP 68-9, 104-5). 52 Jung on being able to prophesy war because he carried it inside him: RB 241b with n.106. Alchemists on the inner "fighting and violence and war": Olympiodorus, On the sacred art 28 in Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs, ed. M. Berthelot (Texte grec, Paris 1887-88) 86.4 (maché kai bia kai polemos); NOTES TO PAGES 410-415 783 MC 350-1 §493 (cited in the context of the alchemist's despair, depression, and katabasis or descent into the underworld); Reality 345. For Jung's most important work disturbing his sleep and the tranquillity of his mind "in its deepest layers" see e.g. JW 118 = JL i 492; and on the final struggle, against dangerous odds, to complete his last piece of work cf. D. Bair, Jung (Boston 2003) 619. *3 Jung's mystical experiences in 1944, and what happened afterwards: MDR 270- -- 7/289-98. His intense initial irritation (ibid. 275/295) didn't simply disappear (D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 528). The fact that the real mysterium coniunctionis paradoxically takes place on another level of existence offers a direct parallel to Jung's statement that the true path of psychological transformation is walked not by our conscious human ego, but by the divine Self inside us (MC 349 §492). As Edward Edinger indicates with a fair degree of accuracy, although without exploring any of the practical or existential implications, "There is reason to believe that the coniunctio is only experienced in its complete form in physical death" (PP 25, 1991, 50-1). For physical existence as a prison compare Jung's explicit remarks (UDR 273/292, 275/295, cf. JL i 358) with e.g. Hans Jonas' The Gnostic religion (2"* ed., Boston 1963), AE and Henry Corbin's L'homme de lumiére dans le soufisme iranien (Paris 1971) = The man of light in Iranian Sufism (Boulder 1978); also Plato, Phaedo 62b (Pythagorean tradition), Cratylus 400c (Orphic); and on the unbearable crampedness of being confined in the physical world note already Empedocles frs, 2.1 (steinépoi) and 126 Diels = frs. 7.8 and 170 Gemelli Marciano. For Jung living "in another world" while he was writing see Bair 528. His final book and the experience of transcendence: /P 233. For his last few months of living "in an 'in between' state ... leaving the ego and the mind out" with 784 FOUR : CATAFALQUE "another kind of awareness, on a very deep level ... that Jung has always known about" without "until now really taking it on", see D. Russell, The life and ideas of James Hillman i (New York 2013) 468-9; and compare with this his comments to Kristine Mann in 1945 on the process of voiding oneself of the whole world, along with "the ego -- will", as a preparation for death (JZ i 357-8; S. Shamdasani, Quadrant 38/1, 2008, 23). *4 For Fordham and Hillman as arguably the "two major original figures following in the wake of Jung" see 5. Shamdasani in D. Russell, The life and ideas of James Hillman i (New York 2013) xi. "I believe that I was ... made him feel a failure": M. Fordham, The making of an analyst (London 1993) 119-20; cf. J. Astor, Michael Fordham: innovations in analytical psychology (London 1995) 33-4, W. Colman, JAP 42 (1997) 342, JM 351. The disturbing image of Jung as world saviour was obviously a discussion point among the London Jungians (E. Rolfe, Encounter with Jung, Boston 1989, 163, cf. also JL ii 586 -- -9) -- a strange reversion to what had troubled Freud half a century earlier (The complete correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Ernest Jones, 1908-1939, ed. R.A. Paskauskas, Cambridge, MA 1993, 182). > For Marie-Louise von Franz's comments during her interview with Suzanne Wagner in March 1977, at her own Bollingen tower, see FRJ i 41:33-45:40. The comments have also been edited, for film, at MH 1:36:09-1:39:56 and, for the printed word, at PP 38 (1998) 24 -- 5. I am most grateful to Suzanne Wagner for sending me her unedited transcript of von Franz's words, based on the original film footage, and I have followed her in editing von Franz's English very slightly here or there where the sense isn't altogether clear. For Barbara Hannah's statement that von Franz saw Jung for the last time NOTES TO PAGES 415-422 785 eight days before he died see her Jung, his life and work (New York 1976) 347: "His last visions were largely concerned with the future of the world after his death. He told Marie -- Louise, the last time she saw him, eight days before his death, that he had had a vision in which a large part of the world was destroyed, but he added, "Thank God not all of it'." It should be noted that throughout this final stage of Jung's life he had the greatest difficulty speaking (Aniela Jaffé in J. Trinick, The frre-tried stone, Marazion 1967, 12; D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 622-3). For the primarily oral phenomenon of "ring composition" compare e.g. W.A.A. van Otterlo, Untersuchungen liber Begriff, Anwendung und Entstehung der griechischen Ringkomposition (Amsterdam 1944); M.L. West, Zeitschrift fur Papyrologie und Epigraphik 98 (1993) 10-11; ENM 387; Mary Douglas' Thinking in circles (New Haven 2007); and the many further references offered by R. Barney in Plato's 'Republic': a critical guide, ed. M.L. McPherran (Cambridge 2010) 32-51. Marie-Louise von Franz's own unconscious, as well as conscious, resistance to openly discussing Jung's final visions has had the unfortunate effect of making other people's references to them even more confused. See for example A. Baring, The dream of the cosmos (Shaftesbury 2013) 262: "towards the end of his life Jung had a vision of enormous stretches of the Earth devastated, and another just before he died of which he said, "Thank God, it wasn't the whole planet'." For the standard western traditions about the end of a cycle of humanity being marked by unimaginable devastation -- "'terrifying, infinite desolation; enormous wastes of land without limit; almost all living creatures made utterly extinct" -- out of which the seeds or embers of a future cycle will miraculously emerge, see e.g. Plato's Laws 677a -- e with SW 172. For the earliest traditions about Noah see now I. Finkel, The ark before Noah (London 2014). 786 FOUR : CATAFALQUE °° On the removal from his published biography of "a number of Jung's more mystical or superstitious statements", including his own original statement that his "visions at times actually foresaw the deaths" of people he knew, because family members evidently found such "foreboding" prophecies unacceptable for public consumption see A.C. Elms' comments, Uncovering lives (New York 1994) 64; also ibid. 60-1 on the general background to this "ideological censorship". As for von Franz: Jung himself with every justification considered her his most talented and scholarly pupil, his intellectual "hound" (A. Ribi, Analytische Psychologie 13, 1982, 210). But this is not to say that, especially where the realities of prophecy and mysticism are concerned, she had the greatest appreciation for the subtleties of the unconscious. And she was so determined to dispose of all the nonsense about Jung being a prophet that she ended up writing utter nonsense herself -- famously stating that, as the result of a dream he had at around the age of twenty, he "once and for all renounced any kind of identification with" the world of personality no. 2 and from then onwards maintained an attitude of the purest scientific detachment from any inner reality (C.G. Jung. his myth in our time, New York 1975, 41). In this caricature of Jung's development she completely ignores the contrary or compensatory pull of the soul which, during his thirties and the time of his work on the Red book, dragged him back from the onesidedness of his fictitious scientific detachment into the inner world he for a brief while had been able to abandon (M. Stein, /4P 57, 2012, 282-3 with n.5); she just sweeps aside the intensity of his later immersion, particularly when alone on retreat at Bollingen, in the prophetic wisdom of his personality no. 2 (MDR 213-16/225 -- 8, cf. 224/237); and quite unlike Jung, who often emphasized that he was forced against every conscious intention to do the NOTES TO PAGE 424 787 bidding of his personality no. 2, she very revealingly associates the experience of this no. 2 personality with the terrifying experience of taking hallucinogenic drugs and insists that for young people the "ego-consciousness" of their personality no. 1 is "the only thing they have which can guide them forward into the future" (C.G. Jung 41). Ironically, almost humorously in its inevitability, this same paradoxical reluctance to plumb the depths of the inner reality which she appears to navigate with such eloquence and skill emerges again at the time of Jung's final visions. Without any doubt von Franz's greatest and most learned work of collaboration with Jung was her major study of the medieval Aurora consurgens. In it she spent enormous effort as well as passion presenting to the public her arguments for supposing this alchemical text was dictated by Thomas Aquinas, on his deathbed, as the direct result of a powerful vision that erupted from his unconscious and blew away all his scholarly learning just before he died (Aurora consurgens, London 1966). But when confronted with the final prophetic visions of the man she was actually closest to, she finds them so disturbing that she doesn't want to speak about them. It's always nice to talk knowledgeably about eruptions of the unconscious when they are sweet, or happened a few centuries ago, or fit into a preconceived design. But the unconscious itself always tricks us by coming up in the way our conscious minds least expect. As, finally, for the positive pride that von Franz took in "fossilizing" Jung's psychology by insisting all his ideas were quite "final and fixed at his death" (see M. Anthony, Jung's circle of women, York Beach 1999, 66-8 with D. Bair, Jung, Boston 2003, 368, 770 n.69): one can now be a little more specific. As a matter of fact she made sure to fossilize and freeze them not at the moment of his death but already before it, because that was the only way she could manage to 788 FOUR : CATAFALQUE put his last prophetic visions aside and forget them. And just how successful she was at forgetting them is demonstrated by the comment she made, a few years before she died, about why Jung had liked to paint "such a gloomy picture" of the fate lying ahead for the world. He used to present such a terrifying picture, she explained, not because he believed in it or had seen it for himself but because he made the strategic decision to frighten us all as if we are children by consciously exaggerating the seriousness of the dangers we face -- hoping he might be able to shock people out of their normal state in which everyone manages to find ways to push the real facts aside "and then takes a cup of tea and does nothing" (Harvest 48/2, 2002, 147). 57 One of the most memorable results of Aniela Jaffé dressing up Jung's memoirs for publication is the portrayal of the Red book as a purely "aesthetic" piece of work that he decided to give up on because its artful "aestheticizing" needed translating into another medium. But it just so happens that this portrayal of the Red book as aesthetic or aestheticizing, as an "aesthetic elaboration" of his experiences in the underworld, has nothing to do with Jung. It's purely Jaffé's own artistic elaboration and invention: a pastiche of several passages in the unpublished Protocols where Jung was making the entirely different point that he had realized the essential message of the Red book needed translating out from the rough and raw language of prophecy (with MDR 180-1/188 contrast his own statements at JP 144-8, 169; the word "elaboration" comes at. JP 148 but in the context of revelation, not aesthetics). In other words she has turned his meaning completely on its head, substituting her own criticism of the Red book as too "aesthetic" for what had been his very specific concerns about the excruciating crudeness of its overwhelming bluster and prophetic wildness. NOTES TO PAGE 424 789 The first irony here is that, in spite of its beautiful calligraphy and extraordinary paintings, few things would have been more absurdly inappropriate than for Jung himself to describe his Red book as "aesthetic". He could hardly have been clearer about how he understood the word: "Aestheticism is the literary original sin. One doesn't let the whole person speak, one doesn't participate, one shoves it away. Thus everything is only aesthetic" (C.G. Jung, On psychological and visionary art, ed, C.E. Stephenson, Princeton 2015, 83). The second irony in this bizarre situation is that Jung had protested as strongly as possible, while he still had the chance, against the way he saw Jaffé interfering with his memoirs by introducing her own style which was "too feminine" and turning them into something "too aesthetic". Quite characteristically, rather than taking his protest as a sign that she should go back and revise what she had written, the attitude she adopted was just to wait instead: either until he ran out of energy to keep complaining or perhaps until he simply died (letter from Jaffé to Kurt Wolff dated 19 October 1958, Helen and Kurt Wolff papers, Beinecke Library, Yale University; cf. JSB 32-3). And by managing to transform the Red book itself into an aesthetic piece of work she deserves all due credit for her wonderfully successful creation; at the same time, though, she couldn't possibly have demonstrated better what he was warning about. Then there is the greatest irony of all. In the pages of Memories, dreams, reflections leading straight up to this paragraph where Aniela Jaffé demotes the Red book to a simple piece of art, she had included the lengthy passage documenting Jung's fierce struggle not only with a certain woman he bluntly described as "aesthetic" but also with his own internal feminine anima -- both of whom were determined at all costs to convince him that in labouring on the Red book he was producing 790 FOUR : CATAFALQUE nothing but an aesthetic piece of art (WDR 178-80/185-8; for the "aesthetic" woman cf. 187/195). Jung had managed to silence this seductive voice. Jaffé plainly didn't and instead, through her closeness to Jung, was unconscious enough as a woman to fall into a total identification with his anima: on some of the strange complexities of her working relationship with Jung, see M. Saban in How and why we still read Jung, ed. J. Kirsch and M. Stein (Hove 2013) 13. Countless people have been tricked by her characterization of the Red d00k as an "aesthetic elaboration", even including members of Jung's family (RB viii) and the editor of the Red book itself (S. Shamdasani, Journal of sandplay therapy 24/1, 2015, 13). Both Wolfgang Giegerich (Spring 83, 2010, 380) and David Tacey (JAP 59, 2014, 470-81) have, only too predictably, made it a major plank in their arguments that the Red 00k is unworthy of serious consideration by any self-respecting Jungian. But to get from these completely illusory assessments to the truth lying hidden behind them would mean having to travel a long, and painful, road. *8 T have already mentioned the only too typical example of how -- in terms strangely evocative of a medieval heresy -- hunter, which is what on an unconscious level we moderns have become -- Andreas Schweizer collapses the broad category of "prophecy" into the single category of "false prophecy" so he can propose a saving remedy for rescuing us from the pernicious dangers of the Red book (JJ 5/3, 2011, 79-81). Then there are other Jungians who, apparently unaware of their own rationalistic inflation, denounce the prophetic tone of the Red book as proof of Jung's narcissistic inflatedness at the time ("Il se peut tout a fait que ses visions aient été prophétiques. Mais sa réponse le montre identifié 4 la source archétypique, condition du narcissisme ... I] semble en proie 4 l'inflation": N. NOTES TO PAGES 424-425 791 Schwartz -- Salant, Cahiers jungiens de psychanalyse 134, 2011, 97-8). These rejections of the prophetic element inside the Red book ultimately go back, it should be added, to Jungian literature dating from well before that particular work was ever published. Compare for example J.W. Heisig, Imago Dei (Lewisburg 1979) 106, on the "certain tone of prophetic authority in Jung's mature style" which demonstrates how "tainted" he was by antagonism towards other schools of psychology; or M. Welland, Studies in religion 26 (1997) 307-8, who cites Jung's prophetic tone in Answer to Job as showing how dangerous psychological inflation can be. Quite similarly, in recent comments by Jungians about Jung it's not unusual to find the word "prophetic" grouped together with other terms such as "angry, intemperate, aggressive" (M. Stein, JAP 52, 2007, 312) when touching on the subject of his Answer to Job: the temptation to compare such comments with Jung's own dream, which he linked straight to his work on Answer to Job, about those psychologists who are quite incapable of understanding the inspired and biblically prophetic figure of his father (ETG 219-22, MDR 206- -- 8/216-18) can seem overwhelming. Here, it will be noted, we have arrived at the uniquely special point where both Jung's fiercest defenders and his fiercest critics (e.g. R. Noll, The Jung cult, 2°4 ed., New York 1997, 14-15) can see eye to eye. he idea of having prophetic powers belongs, everyone can agree, to the outdated realms of magic and myth; is self-evident proof of narcissistic inflation; and is totally unacceptable in our modern rational world. I should just add one honourable exception, in the form of John Beebe's openness and willingness to accept that Jung had visions which were genuinely prophetic ("The problems of World War I were presented to Jung from within, in the form of visions that he interpreted as prophetic. And I personally would agree: They convince me that they are prophetic", PP 53, 2010, 431). In 792 FOUR ! CATAFALQUE fact he even refers to Jung's deathbed vision and the profound challenges it poses, although without saying anything specific about how such challenges could possibly be met: "on his deathbed Jung supposedly told von Franz about a vision -- something about 'the last 50 years of the human race'. And of course that was in 1961. We're in 2010, so next year is 2011, which would be 50 years after that vision on his deathbed. We have been going right on, many of us, neglecting the spirit of the depths. And at just this time", he notes, the Red book "comes out. The world today is not unlike the lead-up to World War I. The book is a reminder of the dangers of neglecting the depths -- and the possibility of taking them up in an individual way" (ibid. 432). *? Malista anthrépoi chrésméidousin, hotan mellésin apothaneisthai: Plato, Apology 39c; J. Bussanich in The Bloomsbury companion to Socrates, ed. Bussanich and N.D. Smith (London 2013) 290-1. Divinare morientes: Posidonius fr. 108 Edelstein -- Kidd = Cicero, On divination 1.64. For the importance attached, throughout the history of western culture, to the prophetic words and visions of a dying person note also Aristotle fr. 10 Rose = Aristotele: della filosofia, ed. M. Untersteiner (Rome 1963) 22-3 §12a; Cicero, On divination 1.63 -- 5 with A.S. Pease's comments in M. Tulli Ciceronis de divinatione liber primus (Urbana 1920) 204-9 on the persistence of this idea from Homer through to modern rural traditions as well as D. Wardle, Cicero: on divination, book 1 (Oxford 2006) 66, 264-9; Diodorus Siculus, Historical library 18.1.1 (Pythagorean tradition); J.D.P. Bolton, Aristeas of Proconnesus (Oxford 1962) 154-5, 202 n.16; E.R. Dodds, The ancient concept of progress (Oxford 1973) 180 with n.5; K.S. Guthke, Last words (Princeton 1992) 38-42, 157, 165, 184, 193 n.21, 220 n.6; T. Doring, Performances of mourning NOTES TO PAGE 425 793 in Shakespearean theatre and early modern culture (Basingstoke 2006) 44 -- 6; and in Judaism, $.L. Drob, Kabbalistic visions (New Orleans 2010) 219. As for the particular case of Socrates: aside from his famous words in Plato's Apology about the tradition of prophesying at the point of death, we also have his even more famous final words which he speaks to a friend just before dying at the very end of Plato's Phaedo: "Crito, we owe a cock to Asclepius so do make sure to pay him and don't forget" (118a). Although Plato was a notorious fiction -- writer, Socrates had been far too well known a figure in Athens for him simply to invent such a statement. And as for what it means: while Jung's final attempt to communicate before dying has been virtually ignored, the opposite fate has been reserved for Socrates' last words. Scholars themselves have obsessively counted up over twenty-five different interpretations of this reference by Socrates to the healing god Asclepius, each new one even more ridiculous and far-fetched than the one that came before (for some recent listings see S. Peterson in Desire, identity and existence, ed. N. Reshotko, Kelowna 2003, 33-5; M.L. McPherran, Ancient philosophy 23, 2003, 73-5 with n.8). Still the only remotely plausible interpretation is the one often attributed to Friedrich Nietzsche, even though in fact it goes back one and a half thousand years before Nietzsche to the philosopher Damascius -- who has a remarkably good record for being spot on in his explanations of passages from Plato's Phaedo (APMM 120-6, 181-2, 193-4). That interpretation is as simple, and meaningful, as it's elegant: a cock is traditionally offered to Asclepius when someone has just been healed and Socrates, on the point of dying, is asking his friend to offer a cock to the god because he sees his own death as the ultimate healing (Damascius, Commentary on Plato's 'Phaedo', ed. L.G. Westerink, Amsterdam 1977, 284-5 §561, 370-1 §157; 794 FOUR : CATAFALQUE for Socrates' use of the plural "we" in referring primarily to himself compare e.g. Phaedo 116d and A. Nehamas, The art of living, Berkeley 1998, 247). But to most modern philosophers and thinkers this obvious explanation is far too gloomy, not to mention too mystical, as if being mystical or gloomy automatically makes something untrue. Angrily they protest that Socrates would never have endorsed the view of physical existence as a sickness, and in the process they miss what he actually says throughout the course of Plato's Phaedo: that philosophy, real philosophy, is a process of purification from the contaminating physical world which ends in complete separation of soul from body (114c; M. Anderson, Plato and Mietzsche, London 2014, 131-3). Add to this what we happen to know about the historical thinker called Phaedo, which is that he too understood philosophical purification and healing as being one and the same (Julian, Letters 82, 445a Bidez, ouden antaton etnai tét philosophiat, pantas de ek pantén hyp autés kathairesthai bién, G. Boys -- -Stones, Phronesis 49, 2004, 22 n.36), and the picture could hardly be more complete. Throughout this entire Platonic dialogue Socrates has been insisting that the soul has to be purified by being separated from the body and, at the very end, he offers thanks for the ultimate healing or purification which is physical death. That leaves the only other real objection to this "Nietzschean" way of interpreting Socrates' final words which critics have been able to raise: that it would have been unacceptably presumptuous, sacrilegious, downright inconceivable even to think about owing thanks to the god Asclepius for an act of healing which hasn't yet taken place. "To utter thanks beforehand would be impertinent, if not impious" (G.W. Most, Classical quarterly 43, 1993, 104); "Socrates cannot owe a past debt for something that has not yet happened" and "cannot be at all sure that he is about to NOTES TO PAGES 425-426 795 take a vacation in the Isles of the Blest" (McPherran 76). And here we encounter the utter foolishness of scholars who, aside from being the murderers Jung accused them of being, can never quite manage to see the obvious. These are Socrates' last words at the moment of dying; Socrates himself states in Plato's Apology that the last words spoken at the moment of dying are traditionally visionary, prophetic; and through the visionary grace of prophecy he is now being allowed to see how, after his life of purificatory efforts to die before he dies, the final healing is what lies just ahead. In fact even the smallest of descriptive details at the end of Plato's Phaedo confirm this. In lying down after drinking the poison to die, he is lying down to incubate just like people lying down for ritual incubation at the temples of Asclepius because they are hoping to be healed (117e, cf. Reality 31-46). In requesting Aésychia, silence and stillness, of everyone present (117d-e, cf. IDPW 82-3, 162, 176-82) he is invoking the ritual stillness and silence needed for the healing to take place. And even in covering himself with his cloak, he is hiding himself from this world just as people used to do during the practice of incubation while waiting to be healed (118a, cf. Elizabeth Belfiore in Peterson 50 n.44; Anderson 133-7). As always in the tradition of iatromanteia, or prophetic healing, the healing and the prophecy go hand in hand. But to anyone unwilling to die before dying, that will always be a complete mystery. *° For the humanistic aspects of the ars moriendi, the moment of death as stripping away a person's mask, the hora mortis as "a condensed biography" in its own right, and the crucial role of a trusted friend as "the essential intermediary between a dying speaker and the public" see Lisa Neal's fine study in Reading the Renaissance, ed. J. Hart (New York 1996) 45-61. "There is 796 FOUR : CATAFALQUE no more pretending ... at the bottom of the pot": Michel de Montaigne, Essays 1.19; Neal 47; A. Calhoun, Montaigne and the lives of the philosophers (Newark 2015) 118-20. * Paul Bishop has pointed repeatedly to Jung's familiarity with the long-standing traditions of ars vivendi and ars moriendi: see e.g. Carl Gustav Jung (1875-1961): pour une réévaluation de laeuvre, ed. C. Maillard and V. Liard (Strasbourg 2014) 112-13 with n.41; G. Bright, JAP 59 (2014) 286. For the high value Jung always attached, ever since his early twenties, to prophetic visions see already ZL 41-3 §§129-33, SL 296-9 §§705-14 with Psychology and the occult (Princeton 1977). "Mouth my name ... what it's all about": JB iii 279 (cf. JZ ii 530). For death as the ultimate goal of Jung's psychology see RB 266-7, 2/3- -- 5; the letter from him to Cary Baynes dated 2 November 1945 (CBA: cf. S. Shamdasani, Quadrant 38/1, 2008, 24); JP 309; Spring (1970) 178 = JS 360 ("Man goes through analysis so that he can die. I have analyzed to the end with the end in sight -- to accompany the individual in order that he may die"); and compare the central function of dying before death in both Sufism and Buddhism (T.L. Perreira, The Muslim world 100, 2010, 247-67). The western philosophical teaching about dying before one dies goes back well before the Socrates of Plato's Phaedo to ancient Pythagoreanism (M. Detienne, La notion de 'daimén' dans le pythagorisme ancien, Paris 1963, 60-92; IDPW 61-76; Reality 29-43): one more sign among many of Socrates' indebtedness to Pythagorean tradition. Jung's psychology as preparation for the end of our culture, and the choice between killing our "infantile psychology" or killing ourselves: letter from Jung to Cary Baynes dated 12 April 1959 (JM 352, cf. CBA). His reference, immediately before making these remarks, to the darkest of clouds hanging over the horizon of western civilization makes it altogether clear that he is talking NOTES TO PAGES 426-435 797 not just about preparing for one's own end as an individual but about preparing for the end of a culture: earlier in this same letter he also comments very pointedly on men's primitive habit of hoping that by not acknowledging a danger, and acting as if it doesn't exist, the danger will somehow disappear. And anyone who finds it strange that Jung should be describing his psychology as a preparation not only for our end as individuals, but for the ending of our entire culture -- as the direct manifestation of his concern "for all those who are caught unprepared" because he considers it his inescapable duty to "undertake this thankless task in the expectation that my chisel will make no impression on the hard stone it encounters" -- would be well advised to read the opening to one of his final pieces of work (Flying saucers, London 1959, xi-xii; cf. CT 311- 12 §§589-90 and, for his writing of this text, JP 302). *2 For the spiral movements of Empedocles' cosmic cycles see ENM 384-90 with nn.124 -- -5, 138, and Reality 347-83. Plato takes over these Empedoclean and Pythagorean teachings, embellishing them with the usual brilliant sillinesses, for his myth in the Statesman (268d -- 274e). He describes there how at a certain point the watchful god "let go" of the cosmos and withdrew, together with the other divinities, which is when everything started moving backwards; and, one day at the beginning of 2011, I saw the great Masters who hold the thread linking this physical existence to the world of reality suddenly drop it and withdraw. °' As Martin Heidegger already hinted in 1935: "The spiritual decline of the earth is so far advanced that people are in danger of losing their last spiritual strength, the strength that makes it possible even to see the disintegration and to recognize it as such" (Einfihrung in die Metaphysik, Tubingen 1953, 29 = 798 FOUR : CATAFALQUE Introduction to metaphysics, New Haven 2000, 40). For Jung himself on the infinite difficulties involved in convincing people they are only animals and that they need to make incomprehensible efforts to become, or remain, human see e.g. JL ii xxix. *4 For Joachim's periods of incubation see N. Cohn, The pursuit of the millennium (2"4 ed., New York 1970) 109-10 ("... each age must be preceded by a period of incubation ..."); H.G. Koenigsberger, G.L. Mosse and G.Q. Bowler, Europe in the sixteenth century (2°¢ ed., London 1989) 131; R.G. Kyle, Apocalyptic fever (Eugene 2012) 32. Jung was aware of them, too: Aion 83 §139. For an introduction to the ancient practice of incubation see [DPW and Reality, as well as the standard texts like L. Deubner's De incubatione (Leipzig 1900) and M. Hamilton's Incubation (London 1906); E.J. and L. Edelstein, Asclepius (2 vols., Baltimore 1945); C.A. Meier, Ancient incubation and modern psychotherapy (Evanston 1967) = Healing dream and ritual (Einsiedeln 1989), originally published as the first study of the C.G. Jung Institute (cf. SZ 487-8). On the role of incubation in the ancient Near East and rest of Asia see e.g. K. Bulkeley, Dreaming in the world's religions (New York 2008) and K. Kim, Incubation as a type -- -scene in the Aghatu, Kirta and Hannab stories (Leiden 2011). "T am refuted ... open only in the night": Seelenprobleme der Gegenwart (Zurich 1931) 432-3; cf. CT'93 §194. On the situation -- both personally and for a whole age -- where "all the methods that seem appropriate have already been tried out with no success whatever" but no one has the courage to admit there is nothing to be done because everybody is so "busy hatching out clever plans to meet the situation" see ibid. 148 §§313~-14. For the Sufi who insisted that "This is no time for NOTES TO PAGES 4357444. 799 prayer, it is the time for resignation. When doom descends, prayer profits not", see 'Umar ibn Wasil in D.S. Margoliouth, The table -- talk of a Mesopotamian judge (London 1921-22) i 215, ii 226 and G. Bowering, The mystical vision of existence in classical Islam (Berlin 1980) 88: through his connection to Sahl al -- Tustari, Ibn Wasil was a part of the secret Gnostic lineage responsible for bringing the "Pythagorean leaven" along with the essence of Empedocles' teaching into Islam (APMM 388-90). On the alchemical, as well as Hermetic, doctrine of total submission to fate see e.g. Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs, ed. M. Berthelot (Texte grec, Paris 1887-88) 229.3-230.16 (Zosimos of Panopolis on the letter omega, ed. H.M. Jackson, Missoula 1978, 20-5 = Zosime de Panopolis, 'Mémoires authentiques', ed. M. Mertens, Paris 1995, 2 -- 4); G. Fowden, The Egyptian Hermes (2" ed., Princeton 1993) 109, 124. For Jung on the "small and fragmentary people" who always need to be doing something see Asia 39 (1939) 97 = CT 526 §1006. On psychological work as nothing but the initial, preliminary steps along the path towards death compare S. Shamdasani, Quadrant 38/1 (2008) 24, citing Jung's letter to Cary Baynes dated 2 November 1945 (CBA); Spring (1970) 178 = JS 360; also JP 309 where he emphasizes how rare it is for people to arrive consciously at being able to endure the final stage. For his language when he describes death as the process of being stripped of everything, see MMDR 271/290-1 along with the well-thought-out rationalizations offered by Edward Edinger in his Archetype of the apocalypse (Chicago 1999) 154-5. For the language of shedding, note especially Jung's comments in 1959 to the effect that "All the riches I seem to possess are also my poverty, my lonesomeness in the world. 'he more I seem to possess, the more I stand to lose, when I get ready to approach the dark gate ... Whatever I have acquired serves a purpose T have not foreseen. Everything has to be shed and nothing 800 FOUR : CATAFALQUE remains my own. I quite agree with you: it is not easy to reach utmost poverty and simplicity. But it meets you, unbidden, on the way to the end of this existence" (JW 298, cf. JZ ii 516). "The future should be left ...": RBu 305a (cf. RB 306b); for the connection between this "way of what is to come" and the terrors of death, the destruction of civilizations, the collapses and ends of empires, see RB 235b, 236b. INDEX A Abraham 357) 378, 645; /20-I, 74° Abraxas 509, 579-80, 604 adaptation 217, 255, 265, 318 -- 19, 325-6, 401, 415, 423, 654, 695 Adler, Gerhard 507, 512, 520, 526, 774, 779 adoption 46, 52, 152, 156, 489, aestheticism 424, 694, 788-90 afrad 743 Agathodaimon 580 ai6n 347, §37-8, 608, 714, 777: Aion 347-8, 353-4) 574 587, 686, 714-18, 736 alchemical tradition 35, 75, 89, 103, 108-9, I17, 122, 133-4, I5O -- I, 171, 181-205, 302, 328-33, 413, 443, 475, 478-9, 500, | 505, 510, 545-50, 564, @ 570-1, 579, 586-99, 605- 13; 653, 661-2, 683-4, 700-7, 745-6, 757, 782-3; 787, 799 aloneness and the alone 45, 66, 71, 86, 102, 108, 110, 125, 134, 141, 145, 181, 213, 231, 235, 264, 269-70, 294, 319, 326, 329, 340, 350, 358, 364, 367, 372, 378, 382-4, 389, 408, 443, 497) 533, 598, 742-5, 786, 799 ambiguity 34, 50, 63, 76-8, 278, 323, 410, 426, 479, 497s §11-13 America 218-27, 239-40, 467, 512, 522, 530, 616-26, Amos 351, 357, 715-16 | ancestors 16-17, 53, 182, 191, 203, 215, 223-4, 272, 300, 444, 480-2, 489, 527, 596, 608, 620-1, 707 anima and animus 23, 600, 691-2, 771, 789-90 animals 153, 156, 234, 242-4, 298, 430, 436, 480, 497, 637-8, 680, 734-5, 798 Answer to Job 353-6, 376-85, 391, 419, 535, 686, 717- 20, 736-44, 775 7785 791 Anthropos 19, 143, 468, 543, 555» 684 anti-Semitism 356, 719 Apamea 634 Aphrodite 19, 502 apocalypse 69, 407, 494, 505, Apollo 31-2, 476 apostles 312, 400, 552, 598, 689 Aquarius, age of 402-7, 774, Aquinas, St Thomas 787 archaeology 45-6, 185, 213, 307, 485, 5 85-6 archetypes and the archetypal 18-24, 30, 86, 89, 103, 107-110, 118, 135, 140-4, 170, 186, 253-4, 309-13, 319, 323, 408, 468, 488, 518, 530, 555-6, 563, 577-80, 616, 666, 686, 688-9, 718, 757-60 Ardé Viraz namag 674 arguing with God 290-2, 354- 7, 631, 671-2, 719-21 Aristotle 28, 35, 47-8, 51, 57- 8, 7) 85, 87, I9I, 200-3, PART SEVEN 219, 229, 291, 298, 364, 476, 484-7, 491, 503, 513; §21, 596, 607-10, 641-2, 671, 679, 723, 761, 792 ars moriendi and ars vivendi 426, 795-6 Ascona 7, 741 Asclepius 529, 604, 793-5 assimilation 115, 170, 541, 577-8 Atlantis 220, 478, 616 Aurobindo, Sri 483 aurora consurgens 727 Aurora consurgens 787 B Babylonian traditions (see also Mesopotamia) 227, 235, 306, 422, 630-1, 697 balance 12, 26, 39, 60, 66, 87, 166, 173, 249, 262, 265, 291, 304, 325, 341, 353-4, 410, 494, 502, 574 Barnaud, Nicholas 7or Basilides 560, 567 Baynes, Cary (see also de Angulo, Cary) 529, 548, 603, 651, 663-5, 699, 718-19, 770, 779, 796 Baynes, Peter 651 begging 35, 129, 131, 320 -- I, 488, 658 Bektashis 725, 742 Bernard of Treviso 607 INDEX A~C Bhagavad gité 303, 685 Bible, the 265-6, 293, 343; 351-2, 568, 655, 716 biblical literature and traditions 141, 204, 239, 241, 248, 254-5, 287, 292, 297, 308, 323, 338, 351, 3545 357, 366, 484, 509, 536, 546, 549, 568, 594, 598, 629-32, 636-7, 641-6, 652-4, 667~75, 679, 683, 688, 693-4, 709, 7II-I2, 716-21, 740, 791 37, 147-8, 156, 182, 232-4, 240-8, 254-5, 275; 310, 430, 433, 519, 628-9, 637-41 Black books 169, 538, 715 Blake, William 244, 296, 343, 639, 641, 667, 676-9, 711 blindness 34-5, 46, 56, 59, 103, 129, 166, 181, 183, 286, 288, 295-6, 433, 475, 585; 619, 667, 675-80, 723) Bodhisattvas 282, 303, 665-6, Boehme, Jacob 677 Bollingen 81-3, 97-104, 150, 153, 164, 177, 206-8, 232, 302, 321, 328, 380, 517, 525-9, 549, 564-5, 573; 579 583, 597, 608, 623, 629, 684, 741, 777) 784; birds breath and breathing 25, 47-8, 84, 208, 239, 485-6, 550, bridges and bridging 125, 186 -- 9, 192, 479, 586, 593-4, Brunton, Paul 501, 507 Buber, Martin 157-9, 165, 559, 566-70 Buddha 39, 282-3, 303, 306- II, 665-6, 685, 690, 706 Buddhism 129, 229, 306, 392, C C.G. Jung Institute in Zurich 395-400, 708, 768-70, 773» 798 calligraphy 313-14, 789 Cambridge University 45 Campbell, Joseph and Jean 623 Cassandra 297-8, 672, 679 China 129, 306, 404, 590 chivalry 110, 371, 384, 387-8, 527, 730, 748, 767 choicelessness and choice 13, 25, 38, 41, 55, 82, 85, 98, 107-110, 120, 221-2, 226-8, 240, 275, 316-27, 353-6, 369, 372-3, 41I -- 14, 423-8, 445, 504, 515, 563, 694, 714, 718, 726, 728, 732, 786-7, 796 Christ 29, 40, 63, 115, 121, 1324) 141-4, 166-7, 174, 179, 194, 252-4, 283, 299, 303, 306-11, 314, 323, 355» 366, 378, 399-403, 482, 499, 540-2, 550-8, 575» 594, 598, 685, 688, 692, 706, 719, 737, 774 Christianity 29, 32, 40, 127-9, 145-6, 174, 185, 191, 199, 237-8, 248, 278-9, 287, 293, 306, 314, 331, 348-9, 392, 399-400, 406, 505, 542, 554, 559; 582-8, 596, 605-6, 631-3, 641, 646, 661, 664, 668, 673, 687, 692, 756, 764, 774) 777-8 "Christification of many" 111, 402-3, 535» 775 church, secret or invisible 314, 365-6, 372, 594, 692-3, circles and circling 7-8, 44, 47, 76-7, 86, 196, §10, 513, 600-1 cognitio matutina 376, 727, 735-6 comfort 9, 17, 24, 53, 132, 172-4, 181, 273, 276, 290, 299, 581, 632, 735 compensation 39, 60, 71, 182, 338-42, 355» 439» 494, 708-11, 717, 786 concealment 65, 70-1, 156-9, 164-5, 177, 183-4, 259- PART SEVEN 64, 279, 296, 301, 319-21, 325-9) 333-4 350-1; 424-8, 501, 566, 569, 582-3, 650, 677-8, 696, 799; 797 795 consciousness and unconscious- ness 33-6, 42 -- 6, 60, 81 -- 8, IOQ -- 112, 135-7, 143-8, 201-2, 206-8, 217-26, 261-6, 275-6, 299-301, 313, 323-6, 333-4) 337- 43> 349» 355-7) 499-10, 419-23, 467-8, 479, 486 -- 7» 51§-17) 539-2, 540, 549, 554, 563, 611, 615, 619-23, 643-5, 654-5, 660, 691, 708, 710, 719, 721, 7449 753-4 761, 780, 783, 799 contamination 140, 164, 309, 352, 376, 794 contradiction 113, 135, 160-6, 356, 479, 501, 571-2, 702, 708, 719, 780 contrary, the 17, 423 conversion 129, 365, 372, 390 -- 2, 73071 Corbin, Henry 8-9, 25, 188, 246, 310, 363-94, 397-8, 465-7, 474, 527, 553, 633, 641, 663, 683, 687-93, 707, 718, 720, 723-67, 771, 783 Corbin, Stella 364-5, 367-8, 372, 388, 398, 726, 728, INDEX C~D 741-2, 748-50, 755 cosmic cycles 371, 429-31, 545; coyote 17, 249 cries and crying 108, 195, 214, 232-49, 2575 264, 274-5) 321, 350, 537, 628-32, 635, 647, 659, 664, 696, crucifixion 133, 299, 337, 400, 482, 551, 667 "cultural unconscious" 547 D daimon or daimonic 86 -- 90, 107; 395» 313) 333» 354 502, 520-3 Damascius 484, 793 danger 18-20, 23-4, 60, 84, 89-90, 99, 113, 119, 126-9, 135, 142, 164, 195, 220~4, 255, 260-8, 275, 296, 323, 369, 399, 466, 470, 490-2, 495, 508, 512, 516, 556, 571, 586, 618, 622, 655, 697, 708, 729, 750, 756, 773; 788-92, 797 Dante Alighieri 294, 674 darkness 43-50, 59-61, 66-7, 107-8, 121, 129-30, 140 -- - 4, 150, 181-8, 208, 230-1, 279, 314, 354-5, 393-4, 403-8, 440, 487, 492, 496-7, 509, 519, 529-30, 548-9, 590, 611, 678, 738-9, 767, 776-8, 796 Darwin, Charles 481 dawn 49-50, 121, 368-81, 393, 439, 487, 726-7, 735, 742, de Angulo, Cary (see also Baynes, Cary) 280-8, 292, 301, 305-14, 502-3, 518-19, 529, 538, 542, 564, 659, 663-7, 671, 685-7, 697, 740, 758 de Angulo Roelli, Ximena 514 dead, the 17, 43, 54, 58, 62-3, 7374» 85-6, 104, 156, 182-4, 189, 193-4, 204, 223-4, 236, 264, 272-3, 294-5) 299, 318, 320, 3555 369, 384, 434, 437-9, 444, 529, 585, 593, 614, 621-2, 630-1, 695 death and dying 20, 53-5, 63, 79» 123, 173, 179, 204-6, 236, 270, 272, 296, 317, 323, 344-7, 370-1, 383, 387-9, 408, 414-28, 442, 469, 498, 533, 583-4, 614, 694, 714, 721-2, 783-8, 792-7, 799-800 deception and lies 20, 35, 77, 85, 108, 155, 158, 162-5, 184, 259-60, 264, 319- 20, 325, 355» 496, 517, 530, 544, 569, 572, 623, 650, 653, 677-9, 719, 767 deification 114, 136, 268, 278, 294, 347) 537-95 553» 655; Delphi 31-2, 478 depression 237, 243, 408-10, 779-83 Derrida, Jacques 492 devastation 31, 419-22, 785 devil 61, 70, 168, 182, 310, 380, 495, 653, 689, 692, 755 ahikr 246 Dieterich, Albrecht 493, 509, 539, 565, 576, 593, 684 dilettantism 83, 327-35, 698 -- 9, 702-3, 708 disciples 20, 63-4, 90, 113, 134, 195, 203, 252, 267-75, 312, 357, 378, 397-400, 469, 500, 552, 646-7, 655-9, 688-9, 772-4 disgust 128, 276, 282, 285, 317, 660-1, 678 divinare morientes 425, 792 Dodona 638 dogma and dogmatism 9, 34, 104, 114, 146, 152, 191, 195, 200, 217, 238, 250, 278, 293, 314, 357) 370; 374, 392, 397-8, 466, 599-600, 633, 643, 649, 721, 743, 762, 771 domestication 9, 21, 30, 78, 120, 213-14, 234, 544 double negative 263, 653 PART SEVEN doubt 162, 181, 253-4, 257, 290-2, 311, 330, 348, 480, 519-20, 571-2, 689 dreams and dreaming 12-13, 35-6, 44-8, 54, 79-82, I0O -- I, 124-6, 131-4, 141, 182, 194 -- 6, 204, 213-16, 286-91, 305, 313, 321, 333» 397) 411, 427, 433, 441, 487, 502, 526-9, 539, 546, 551-2, 601, 614, 622, 624, 664, 667-71, 691, 697, 704, 706-7, 719, 7375 740, 770, 776, 786, 791, dualism 66-7, 160, 165-6, 468-9, 501-2, 569-75, 588-9, 595, 687, 739 E Eckhart, Meister 404-5, 663, 759» 767, 776 ecstasy 45-6, 58, 239, 297, 347, 414, 641, 714, 727 Eddy, Mary Baker 696 Edinger, Edward 251-5, 264 -- - 5, 268, 512, 535-6, 545, 548, 600, 643-7, 654-5, 710 775» 779» 783s 799 Egypt 149, 196, 199-203, 219, 561, 577, 612-13, 617, 638 Eisler, Robert 538-9 Elijah 204, 294, 305-6, 372, 540, 614, 673, 680, 683, INDEX D-F 694, 731, 740, 744-5 Eliot, T'S. 466 Ellenberger, Henri 696, 772 Empedocles 41-3, 61, 67-8, 75-8, 85-7, 103, II0, 116, 132, 160, 165-6, 169, 176, 197-205, 231, 235, 264, 270-4, 297, 397, 310, 315, 318-21, 325, 331, 335, 363, 369-70, 421, 429; 466, 474, 481-2, 486, 502-4, 508-13, 521, 526, 533-4» 539» 5425 545» 5505 559 569, 574-75 581-3; 596, 602-14, 627-31, 642, 653, 658, 675, 679, 681, 687, 695-7, 702, 704, 721-3, 728-9, 732-3, 75> 779» 783, 797s 799 empiricism 65, 75, 158, 468, entrails 36, 246-7, 286, 667 Epimenides 298, 679 Eranos 7-9, 366, 376, 391, 465-7, 579-80, 658, 687, 699-700, 703-5, 738, 745-50, 764 esotericism and the esoteric 44, 51, 116, 152, 245, 259, 365, 376, 381, 390, 532, 542, 569, 576, 650, 699, 7245 735, 762 eternity 162, 179, 193-6, 245, 306-9, 32475, 336, 347; 353, 369-73, 382, 391, J 437-9» 469, 531, 537: 58TTS, 666 Etna, Mount 197, 204, 270, 602-3, 614 | evil 179-82, 303, 544, 584, 687 evolution 33-6, 44, 74, 103, III, 202, 220, 249, 3355 337) 427, 475, 478-83, 505, 526, 533, 600, 612, 643, 702, 708, 763, 775-7 Ezekiel 629, 642-3, 653, 711, F failure 119-20, 255 -- 6, 265, 284, 292, 383-4, 406-9, 416-17, 511, 779 faith 443, 696 father, spiritual 43, 46, 52-3, §8, 150-3, 157, 171, 302 -- - 5, 311, 388, 489, 564-5, 683, 714 "father of prophets" 283-4, 288, 301-3, 306-7, 357, 394, 666, 683, 721, 747 Faust and the Faustian 168, 177-81, 192, 195, 299, 335 397, 528, 575, 583-4, fear and terror 23-6, 53, 58, 62, 70, 82, 86-9, 115-16, 133, 145, 148-9, 1535 164-5, 173-4, 181, 197, 219, 222, 243, 254, 278, 282, 287, 296, 299, 311, 354, 378; 421, 427, 429, 431, 471-2, 492, 505, 518-19, 541, 546, 560-1, 565, 573, 582, 588, 590, 597) 619-20, 632, 635, 662, 678, 681, 686, 740, 746, 764, 778, 785, 788, 800 fire 57, 82, 174, 197, 200, 293, 306, 308, 322, 399, 403, 407, 516, 549, 582, 589, 607, 688, 697, 727, 740, 77°, 774, 782 Fordham, Michael 330, 415- 17, 472-3) 574, 704, 784 foundations 42, 129, 147, 189- 93, 305, 346, 404, 430, 495, 560, 593-8, 705, 758 free association 79, 514-15 freedom 9, 27) 32) 35-7) 71; I2I, 140, 164, 180, I9I, 282, 308-9, 314, 317, 333; 337-42, 366-7, 382, 415, 419, 431, 445, 466, 475, 494, 563, 585, 618, 688, 694, 706, 709, 725, 743; 758, 767; 773 Freud, Sigmund 22, 74, 87, 147, 169, 219, 257-60, 277» 279» 291; 301, 314, 410, 471-2, 502, 506, 508, §12, 514, 521, 552, 576, 623, 648-51, 656, 662-3, 670-1, 683, 780, 784 PART SEVEN Frébe -- Kapteyn, Olga 579-80, 699, 703, 735-6, 741, 746, G George, Stefan 493 Gethsemane 134, 378, 552, 737 Giegerich, Wolfgang 486, 525-6, 530, 575» 605, 607, 660, 668, 708, 790 Ginsberg, Allen 238-40, 634- 7, 711 gnosis 130, 146, 528, 550, 558 -- 9, 701, 711, 721 Gnostics and Gnosticism 19, 35, 104, 144-66, 171, 186-205, 232, 259, 279» 293-4, 301-2, 306, 311-14, 331-2, 371, 390, 400, 406, 414-15, 421, 468-9, 478-9, 494, 504, 510, 523, 528, 535, 542, 546, 558-80, 586-606, 612-14, 639, 663, 668, 673, 678, 683-4, 690, 696, 705-6, 711, 715, 721, 729-30, 760, 777, 799 god-almightiness 135-6, 225, 552-3, 624, 775 goés 235, 630-1 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 155-8, 165, 168, 178, 495> §04, 528-9, 541, 566, 575, INDEX F-H 594, 680 golden chain 187, 586-7 golden thread 621-2 grace 292, 317, 401, 405, 671, 693-4, 774 795 Grail 110, 123-6, 133-4, 140-1, 185, 194-8, 232, 384, 393-4, 508, 526-7, 533, 585, 599-601, 614, 628-9, 693, 730, 744, 768 greed, spiritual 130-1, 222, 338-9, 393, 548, 709, 757; 7/2 Greek, ancient language and literature 10, 19, 28, 63, 89, IOI, 146, 150, 152-3, 169, 192, 196-7, 200, 235, 278, 297-8, 301-2, 347, 382, 406, 498, 503-4, 516, 546, 550, 581, 591-2, 597) 601, 630, 663, 742-4) 753-4, 761, 777 Guénon, René 245, 640, 755, 762-3, 766-8 Gurdjieff, George Ivanovitch 619, 647 H Habakkuk 357-8, 720-2 Hadot, Pierre 533, 610 Hannah, Barbara 271, 421, 480, 572, 658, 772, 784-5 Harding, Esther 523, 620, 622, eo 645-6, 692-3, 725, 782 Hasidism 556-7 Heidegger, Martin 44, 483, 743,797 hell 56, 61-3, 130, 179-80, 218, 270, 279, 355) 411, 499; 533» 584, 595, 719, 776, Henderson, Joseph 547 Heraclitus 101, 483, 546, 608, 627-8, 684 heresy and heretics 140, 146, 205, 309, 313-14, 348, 371, 392, 400, 558-9, 687, 7295 759, 790 Hermes 150, 161, 370, 529, 569, 604, 700 Hermetic tradition 113, 149- 53, 161, 187, 196-204, 370, 386, 479, 537) 553-45 559-66, 581-2, 601, 604, 612-13, 707, 721, 746, 799 heroism 50, 81, 127, 140-1, 178, 221, 225-~7, 262, 521, 5735 623-6, 672 Hesse, Hermann 147, 681 Heyer, Gustav Richard 500, 609-10 Hillman, James 388, 416, 465, 470, 476, 522, 531, 647, 742, 749-52, 773, 784 historical continuity 122, 182, 188-91, 301, 545, 584, 590, 595, 611 Hitler, Adolf 467, 624 Hoerni, Ulrich 528 Hélderlin, Friedrich 470, 519, Homer 63, 79, 87, 101, 297, 498, 521, §29, 605, 680, 694-5, 792 hope 34, 119-20, 221-2, 234-5, 271, 333» 337, 398, 431, 442-3, 505-6, 519, 581-2, 633, 757, 704, 7775 797 hora mortis 426, 795 Horace 614, 642, 658 howling 17, 195, 214, 234-55, 343, 432, 629-37, 643, Hull, R.F.C. Qung's English translator) 23, 163 -- 4, 473, 572, 651, 781 I Iamblichus 513, 591, 638, 684, 753-4 tatromantis 76, S11, 513, 795 Ibn al -- Arabi, Muhyi al-Din 380, 553-4, 661, 745, 759 Ibn Wasil, "Umar 799 identification and disidenti- fication 18-20, 24, 89, 135-42, 149-51, 161, 166, 170, 178, 225, 251, 262, 274, 306-11, 315, 319, 342, 350, 444, 469-70, 507, 516, 540, 555, 562, PART SEVEN §72, 580, 599, 609, 624, 629, 652, 681, 689, 697, 708, 710, 715, 758, 786, 79° imaginatio vera 386, 745-7, 753-4 imagination 53-4, 62, 156 -- 7, 385-6, 388, 414, 667, 677-8, 745-54 imitatio Christi 349 imitation 23, 114-16, 129, 153, 157; 269-73, 3575 389, 400, 466, 540, 548, 657-8, 771-2 immortality 114, 196-7, 537-9, 551, 602 -- 3, 658 impersonal, the 107-110, 118, 143, 191, 194, 207, 334, 415, 531, 665 impossible, the 10, 61, 89, 104, 119-20, 130-1, 140, 143, 153, 173-6, 206, 248, 282, 288, 309, 319, 325-6, 342, 345, 394, 406, 443, 519, 527-8, 543, 557s 593, 665, 713, 757 incantation 43-6, 56, 68, 76, 239, 503-4, 508, 635-6, incubation 45-6, 79, 298, 437, 440, 484-5, 490, 493, 775, 795, 798 India 124-7, 133, 194-6, 404, 546, 550-1, 599 individualism 84, 108-9, 142, a, f yo . an INDEX H-J 222, 531 individuation 89, 109-113, 123-4, 140-2, 169, 197, 251, 264-6, 380-3, 389, 392, 396-7, 467, 523, 527, 531-7, 555» 578, 654, 672, 7933) 726, 743-45 704, 769, 780 inflation 19-20, 24, I1I-12, 122, 127, 135-44, 162, 180-1, 202, 251, 261, 265-74, 295, 309-10, 319, 324, 343-4, 352, 469, 514, 535» 552-5 5715 575s 584, 619, 643-6, 654-9, 681, 716, 756-9, 763, 790-1 initiation 43, 51-3, 62, 136, 152, 196, 2455 365-72, 488, 492, 512, 533, 536-8, 548, 553, 565, 578, 664, 680, 746-7, 754 insanity: see madness inscriptions 46, 100-1, 104, 177, 208, 213, 216, 478, 517, 527-9, 583, 608 institutions and institution- alizing 174, 314, 395 402, 562, 582, 650, 708, 708-74 integration 66, 74, 125, 170, 260, 304, 353-4, 380, 414, 444, 501, 535, 5775 609, 683, 692, 739 intellect 380, 746, 757, 759-61 interference 80, 84, 109, 139, © 147, 216, 293, 299, 304, 396, 443, 478, 658, 662, 689, 769, 789 intuition 11, 16, 34, 36, 60, 75, 106, 131, 146, 201, 222, 230, 298, 431, 478, 483-4, §09, 591, 600, 620, 676 inversion and reversal 82, 115, 146, 161, 175, 189-90, 241-2, 331, 377) 396, 421, 429-31, 477) 499, 516, 545» 559, 569, 593 Irenaeus 683-4 Isaiah 283, 287-8, 321, 339-40, 357» 365, 382, 629, 632, 665, 667, 672-3, 675, 684, 693-4, 696, 709-11, 710-17, 724, 752 ishrag 368, 393, 726-7 Ishragi 368-71, 689, 726-7, 73° Islam 238, 242, 247, 365, 370, 372-4, 390-2, 587, 633-4, 640, 690, 724, 7390-3) 745» 799 Istanbul 367, 725, 742 Ivanow, Vladimir 748-9 J Jacobi, Jolande 539, 541, 561-2 Jaffé, Aniela 424, 530, 579, 686, 719, 722, 738, 788-9go Jeremiah 254-5, 629, 631, 641, 667-8, 671-2, 717 jewel, precious 281 -- 4, 288, 301, 309, 394, 665, 668, 676, 678, 683 Jewish traditions 199, 203-4, 231, 235-43, 248-9, 265 -- 6, 292-4, 323, 338, 351-8, 378, 422, 556-7, 568, 604-7, 612-14, 636-8, 641-5, 671-3, 716-21, 749) 752 Joachim of Fiore 348-51, 385, 440, 633, 692, 714-16, 745» 779, 798 Job 354-5, 719-21 John of Rupescissa 716 Jonah 236, 250, 631-2, 671 joy 182, 246, 317, 375, 381, 465, 529, 573» 694, 734-5, 742 Jung, Andreas 722 Jung, Carl Gustav 7-9, 18-24, 27, 34-5) 58-208, 219-27, 232-5, 239, 250-358, 366, 369, 373-429, 434, 438, 443-5) 405-722, 72579; 734-800 Jung, Carl Gustav (Jung's paternal grandfather) 358, 395, 722, 769 Jung, Emma 107, 219, 530, 543, 722 Jung, Franz 507 Jung, Johann Paul Achilles (Jung's father) 352-5, 358, 716-19, 722, 740, PART SEVEN Jung, Vreni 754 K Kabbalah 556-7, 605-7 Ratabasts 493, 522, 679, 682, Keller, Tina 471, 501, 664, 719, 74° Kerényi, Karl 579 Kerouac, Jack 634 ketman 367, 725 Khidr 372, 385, 391, 573, 7315 744-5, 747, 763 Khunrath, Heinrich 551 Kirsch, James 250-1, 264, 378-9, 555, 644-5, 654, 661, 667, 672-3, 737, 739-49; 781 Klages, Ludwig 493 Klaus, Brother 525, 653 Kleinod (see also jewel, precious) 281, 284, 288, 665, 676, knight 99, 103, I10, 120, 124, 134, 185, 196, 371, 384, 508, 526-7 kratér 196-8, 204, 601-2, 613-14 Kubra, Najm al-Din 246-7, Kitisnacht 380, 416, 507, 725, INDEX J -- -M L Lahiji, Abd al-Razzaq 364, Laing, R.D. 22 Lang, Josef 146-7, 495, 559- 60, 593, 652, 681 language 23, 34, 43, 54, 76, gO, 157, 188, 192, 242-7, 263-5, 294-5, 313, 317 -- 26, 332-5, 435, 567, 571; 629, 636, 638, 640-1, 653, 674-5, 693-7 Lao Tzu 646 Latin language and literature 104, 132-3, 150, 192, 200, 278, 301-2, 386, 406-7, 522, 527-8, 550-1, 566, 583, 586, 591, 597, 658, 684, 695, 710, 724, 727, 761, 777-8 laughter and humour 35, 78, 129, 135, 171, 196, 262, 270, 396, 398, 403, 473, 478, 506, 540, 553, 556, 579, 603, 629, 653, 658, 7293 7715 775 lava: see volcanic craters and lava Lawrence, D.H. 618 laws and lawgiving 42, 45, 49-50, 55-6, 72, IIO, 141, 194, 215-18, 227, 229, 240, 284, 297, 303, 323; @ 371, 410, 435, 484, 487 -- 91, 600, 681, 701, 767 leaven 369-70, 373, 728-9, 732, 734+ 799 Leisegang, Hans 504, 523, 539, 560, 606, 612 Liber novus or "new book" 287-302, 339, 667, 678 library, Corbin's 727-8, 748 library, Jung's 74, 152-4, 281, 328, 332, 493, 504, 523, 525, 528-9, 538-9, 546, 554, 556, 576, 589, 591, 593, 604, 606, 628, 665, 678, 683, 706, 753-4 light-bringer 141, 143-4, 549, 557-8 logic 42-9, 54-7, 62, 72, 77-9, 156, 182, 193, 213, 229, 343, 364, 421, 438, 483-4, 490-I, 513 logos 483, 526 Lucifer 108, 121, 175, 407, §30, 545, 778 M madness 12, 19, 21-6, 57-61, 66-7, 145, 166, 183-4, 205-6, 214, 230-2, 235, 238-9, 247-57, 287, 305; 339, 470-4, 489, 491-3, 502, 519, 5747-5» 614, 619, 628, 634-5, 641-3, 648, 660, 707, 709, 712 Maeder, Alphonse 506, 656 magic 7, 43, 49, 68, 75-6, 88 -- 90, 99, 106-7, 123, 137> 145, 152; 168-84, 196, 213-14, 232, 239; 259, 262-3, 273, 280, 282, 299, 308, 319, 325, 330-1, 344-5, 382, 503-4, 509- 10, 522-3, 548-9, 565, 575-85; 602, 604, 635; 657, 659-60, 665, 669, 700) 794, 713) 775 791 Maier, Michael 709 mana- -- personality 577-8, 580 Mani and Manichaeism 232, 303, 306-15, 332-4, 371, . 400, 415, 554, 574, 628, 633-4, 685-91, 706-7, 729-30 Mann, Kristine 620, 622, 784 Martin, P.W. 543, 702-3 Massignon, Louis 725, 731-2, master, the 20, 79, 163, 267-8, 271-3, 305-8, 311, 541, 656-9, 687-8, 758, 797 mastery 46, 88-9, 200, 221, 313, 328, 332-4, 473» 513; 519-20, 556, 618-19, 638, 7°97 McCormick, Fowler 527 McCormick, Harold 693 Mead, G.R.S. 558 PART SEVEN medicine women and men 13-17, 23, 141, 467, 547, 555» 630, 696 meditation 38, 45, 130, 190, 229, 234, 381, 383, 410, 437» 490, 596, 742, 771 Meher Baba 617-18 Meier, C.A. 573, 658, 769-70, 772, 798 Memories, dreams, reflections 124-7, 207-8, 466, 770 Mephistopheles 495, 584 Mercurius 549, 551, 700 Merlin 1, 182, 232-3, 274, 350, 548, 584, 628-9, 653, 659, 715, 829 Mesopotamia (see also Babylonian traditions) 199, 235, 637, 641, 647, metaphysics 114-15, 162, 382, 510, 572, 749» 759» 766-7 métis 319-20, 325-6, 695 Micah 241, 629-30, 637 Miller, David LeRoy 569, 647, 749-59) 755 Missionaries 129, 200, 252, 260, 340, 548, 625 Mithraic mysteries 537-8 Mithras liturgy 565, 576, 593 monos pros monon 382-4, 742-5 Montaigne, Michel de 426-8, 795-6 MOON 99-IO1, 137 INDEX M-N Moses 323, 378, 604, 645, 740, Mountain Lake 138, 223-4, 545, 554, 621-2 Muhammad 200, 238, 303, 306, 309, 370, 632-4, 685, 690, 724, 741 MUSIC 353, 377, 380, 385, 387, 717, 736, 744, 781-2 mystertum coniunctionis 414, 757) 783 Mysterium coniunctionis 151, 346, 543, 594, 652, 687, 713, 758-9 mystery and mysteries 51, 59, 62, 84, 104-5, 110-12, 123-4, 127, 132, 139-40, 152-3, 156-61, 169-70, 183-4, 196-7, 270, 275-9, 294, 308, 342, 347, 350, 369-74, 381-7, 401-2, 414-15, 488, 492, 512, 522-3, 527) 529, 5335 537-40, 565-6, 569, 604-5, 663-4, 684, 689, 692, 707, 742-7, 757-8; 764-8, 795 mystical union 347, 381, 414 -- - 15, 420, 714 mystics and mysticism 8, 20, 23, 27, 29, 42, 49, 68, 70-2, IIO, 116-17, 121, 136-7, 152, 160, 191, 200, 207, 246, 257-9, 310-11, O 314-15, 337) 343-8, 363- 4, 368, 373, 380-2, 386, 400, 404, 414, 487-90, 500, 503, 506-7, 525, 532, 540-3, 551, 553-75 565, 569, 573> 576-7, 602-8, 634, 640, 643, 648, 661, 689, 693, 696, 711-14, 726-7, 734-5, 742, 750, 759, 783, 786, 794 myth 34, 50-5, 62, 110-11, 126, 170, 182, 185-7, 230, 243-4, 272, 433, 478, 488, 509, 526, 533, 577-8, 624, 639, 677, 697-8, 791 N Nag Hammadi 571, 573, 588 Naqshbandis 586 Nasr, Seyyed Hossein 372-4, 389-91, 730-4, 754-6 Native American traditions 13-17, 39, 121, 138-9, 223-4, 249, 409, 444, 623-4, 762 nature and naturalness 38-40, 43, 47) 6o, 66, 745 76-7, 82, 89, 103, 109, 114-16, 120, 146, 190, 197-8, 20I -- 2, 214-16, 228-30, 235-6, 241-6, 253-5, 298, 3225 327) 342-3 355s 413; 423-4, 429-31, 440, 468, 494, 508, 516, 522, 531, 556-7, 596, 598, 611, 631, 637-9, 660, 711, 729 nekyia 493, 497-8, 682 Neoplatonism 559, 609, 617 Neumann, Erich 199, 356, 378, 606, 720, 740, 774 neurosis 118-19, 191, 596, 779 new age 127, 222, 237, 299- 301, 397, 350, 402, 407, 439, 478, 516, 619, 661, 717, 778, 780 New York 224, 238, 252-3, 410, 620-2, 635, 645, 782 Nietzsche, Friedrich 44, 483, 519, 602-3, 660, 666, 686, 688-9, 793 night 45, 49, 126, 304-5, 308, 376, 429, 443, 486-7, 548-9, 664, 677, 686, 688 Noah 422, 785 non-duality 595, 765 Nostradamus 715 "nothing but" 174, 539, 582 nous 753-4, 761 "now", the 595-6 Numenius 634 numinous 71, 107, 118-22, 125, 377) 521, 543-4, 655, 705, 736-7 O Oannes 697 objectivity 107-9, 117, 143, PART SEVEN 156-7, 310, 346, 394, 414-15, 531, 543-4, 567, occultism 169, 171, 219, 330, -- -- -§21, §51, 559, 575-6 Odysseus 317, 319, 497-8, 694-5 omniscience 217, 483, 680 optimism 221-2, 411, 418-24, 442-3, 480, 505, 619-20, 777-8 oracles 31-3, 219, 243, 407, 477-8, 626, 638, 647, 778 original instructions 444 Orpheus and Orphic tradition 503-4, 529, 538, 581, 598, 604-5, 613, 783 orthodoxy 191, 290, 374, 390, 558-9, 570, 588, 604, 609, 655, 673, 678, 692, 730-1, 762, 772 Ovid 566, 575 Oxford University 46 P paintings 63, 150-1, 278-9, 302-7, 312, 344-5, 391; 442, 499, 564, 663, 689- 90, 712, 730, 789 panoptic vision 680 Paracelsus 576, 578, 677, 708 paradox 25, 61-2, 67, 77, 79, 82, 88, 122, 124, 158, 162-3, 188, 310, 323-5, INDEX N-P 333» 364, 386, 392, 415, 444, 468, 492, 497, 503, 513, 541, 546, 553, 563; 569, 571, 597% 675, 759 -- 61, 783 Paris magical papyrus 169, 576-7 Parmenides 43-62, 67-8, 75-9, 85, 87, 110, 116, 156, 165, 176, 193, 200, 203-4, 208, 213-15, 231, 264, 294-5, 318-20, 335, 369, 474-5, 481-91, 502, 504, 509-18, 521, 533, 541-2, 567; 574) 577» 583, 591; 595-6, 607, 611-12, 627, 641, 653, 660, 674~5, 695, 709, 721, 723, 728, 732 Pauli, Wolfgang 397, 682, 793-5» 779-1 penitence and penance 177-84, 192, 583-4, 709 Persephone 43, 54, 104, 502, 528-9 personalities no. 1 and no. 2 66-7, 72, 81, 160-4, 167, 175, 188, 351, 353» 376; 410, 50I~2, 507-8, 563, 569, 572-3, 590, 597) 620, - 677, 781, 786-7 Phaedo 794 phantasia 747, 754 phantasmagoria 190, 593-4 pharmakon 196, 503-4, 602 Philemon 148-57, 164, 167-82, Y 186, 302-6, 357, 518, 561-7, 574-5, 578, 582-5, 604, 657, 680, 683, 697, 704, 714, 721, 746-7, 769 philosopher -- kings 219, 488, 534, 617 philosophy, ancient 41-5, 124, 198-201, 363-4, 427, 606, 609-10 philosophy, modern 200, 408, 609-II philosophy, prophetic 364, 723, physikos 75, 509 pillar 306, 308, 549, 554-5, 608, 688, 740 plants and planting 14, 43, 50, 130 -- I, 153 Plato and Platonism 28-35, 48-58, 79, 85, 201-3, 219-20, 229, 243-4, 294, 390, 476, 484, 486-92, 512-13, 533-4, 608-10, 613, 616-17, 625, 638-9, 674, 679, 682, 760-1, 783, 785, 792-7 : pléréma 331, 468, 705 Plotinus 609, 617, 639, 760 Plutarch 31, 477 Poimandres 566 poison 59-60, 68, 130-1, 493, 593-5) 508, 559, 687, 767, Porphyry 31, 243-4, 290, 477, 606, 617, 639, 7545 760 prayer 246, 381, 443, 559, 664, 742, 798-9 Preiswerk, Samuel 717 primordial experience 331, 392, 509, 677, 764-5 primordial origin 198, 205, 216, 298-300, 4.40, 444, 508-9, 615 primordial revelation 324, 328, 331-3, 336, 706-7 primordial tradition 390, 484, 760-1 prison, existence as a 414-15, privatio boni 687 proclamation 135, 268, 304, 397, 314, 316, 693-4 progress 21, 24, 29, 33-5, 39 40, 44, 51, 117, 168, 175 -- 6, 179-80, 195, 228-30, 250, 289-90, 299, 402-3, 409-10, 427, 479-81, 483, 600, 611-12, 643 projection 170, 178, 201, 263, 273, 383, 539» 578; 775 propatér 302, 683-4 prophecy and prophets 18-19, 31, 45-77, 85, 102, 119, 126, 129, 200~4, 213-19, 227-427, 433-44) 477) 484~-7, 492, 495, 513; 517, 528-9, 551, 556, 562, 573» 598, 613-14, 626-59, 666-724, 732-53, 768-9, 782, 786-96 PART SEVEN prophet-healers (see also iatromantis) 46, 67, 76-7, 213, 239 prophétés 647, 679 prostitution 649 Psychological Club in Zurich 133-4, 552, 693 Psychological types 281-3, 287 -- 8, 542, 665, 667-8, 676, 685, 692 Puech, Henri -- Charles 687 purity and purification 385, 744 753-4) 794-5 Pythagoras and Pythagoreans §0-I, 55, 62-4, 116, 152, 201, 203, 370, 486, 488, 498-9, 534, 609, 611-13, 617, 682, 728, 783, 792, 796-7, 799 Q Quispel, Gilles 538, 558, 573- 4, 579, 612-13, 705 Qur'an 399, 633, 640-1, 726, 741, 762-3 R Rank, Otto 508 Raphael, Alice 155, 553, 566, 583-4, 707 rationality and reason 26-33, 40~5, 48-51, 55-62, 66 -- 71, 77-85, 102-4, 121, INDEX P-R 131, 139, 150, 173-83, 20I -- 3, 214-16, 220-3, 228-30, 234-9, 243-5, 266, 282-5, 288 -- 301, 309-10, 326-7, 331, 337 -- - 9» 342-4, 355-6, 363-4, 373» 377s 380, 396, 414, 424-6, 433, 438, 443, 472, 475-6, 482-8, 492-501, 508, 513, 518, 521-2, 526, 530, 533» 538-40, 545, 557) 562, 572, 578, 581-3, 594, 600, 610, 614, 621, 628, 635, 639, 655-7, 664-9, 677-9, 682, 688, 691, 698, 702-5, 709-11, 7195 737) 7625 775» 790-1 reality, another 190, 346-7, 414 -- 15, 595, 713 rebirth (see a/so reincarnation) 110, 152-3, 191, 196-7, 284, 333» 350, 439, 565, 590, 602-3, 618, 645; 797) Red book 22, 58, 63, 66-72, 102, 108-9, 114, 130, 147, 150-3, 158, 165-83, 198, 204, 260, 269-70, 276-80, 286-353, 369, 378, 383, 391, 395, 401-3; 411-13, 424-6, 444, 470 -- - 4, 492-5, 500-4, 507- -- I1, 515, 518, 531, 538-42, 547) 559 554» 561-4, 569, 575» 589-90, 594, 598, @, 603-4, 615, 625, 638, 648-52, 657-86, 692-718, 728, 741, 774-8, 786-92 reincarnation (see also rebirth) 279; 300-1, 303, 314, 330, 540, 578-9, 683 Reitzenstein, Richard 539, 561, 565, 589, bo1-4, 628, 791; 706-7, 721 religion 114-16, 122, 128, 133, 136, 152, I91, 199-202, 237, 248, 259, 276-9, 283, 289, 293, 304-7, 312-14, 323-4, 346-7, 365, 372, 400, 403-4, 408, 540, 545» 548, 557, 560, 564-5, 570, 633, 645, 649-50, 661-3, 673, 678, 681, 691-2, 696 repetition 43-6, 76, 239, 369, 398, 510-11, 513, 635, 728 responsibility 10-11, 123, 127, 178, 189, 229-31, 341, 393» 443, 545, 767 revelation 44, 165, 200, 230-1, 283-4, 289, 295, 307, 312, 315, 323-36, 378, 380, 394, 627, 666, 668, 690, 697, 706-7, 741, 759, 788 rhetoric 26, 273, 289-95, 483, 492, 576, 636, 669 riddles 77, 177, 186, 200, 225-6, 326, 512, 612, 653, 675, 682 ring composition 422, 785 ritual and ceremonies 153, 171-2, 176, 204-5, 224, 422, 442, 578-81, 614, 621 -- 2, 795 Robb, Barbara 599, 689, 774 Rolfe, Eugene 140-4, 408-9, 416, 549, 553, 555-6, 579; 575, 618, 649, 652, 659, 673, 678, 685, 696, 739, 768, 778-9, 781-2, 784 Rosa, Salvator 63-4, 499 Rimi, Jalal al-Din 230, 626-7, 640, 742 Ruska, Julius s91 Ruspoli, Stéphane 246, 640 Rizbehin al -- Baqli 640-1 S Sahl al-Tustari 799 salvator mundt 132, 550-1 Saoshyant 283-4, 288, 301, 303, 394, 666, 710, 768 Sapientia 278, 663, 764 saviours and salvation 20, 127, 132-44, 172, 195-6, 202-5, 232, 251-2, 258-9, 263, 271, 273, 282-4, 288, 300-3, 307-15, 321, 340, 394, 406, 411, 417, 470, 546, 550-2, 554, 557-8, §88, 602, 611, 614, 649, 657, 659, 665-6, 682, 685, 687 -- 9, 696, 710-11, 765-8, 784, 790 PART SEVEN scepticism 310 -- II Scharf Kluger, Rivkah 643-4, | Schleiermacher, Friedrich 707 scholars and scholarship 36, 44-8, 53, 58-9, 62, 161 -- 2, 170-1, 176, 188 -- 9, 241, 276-85, 338, 342, 364, 368, 482, 489-90, 494-6, 499-50, 503, S11 -- 12, 515, 518, 533, 541, 552, 569-71, 582-3, 591-2, 610, 627-8, 639-40, 72.4, 786-7, 795 Scholem, Gershom 556-7, 730 Schopenhauer, Arthur 670 Schultz, Wolfgang 504, 560 Schuon, Frithjof 483-4, 755, 761-3 science 34-5, 42-3, 47> 59» 61, 65-75; 79» 83-4, 90, 116, 134, 139, 150-4, 157-9, 165, 169-71, 180, 189, 202, 207, 213, 218, 222, 228-9, 278, 289-96, 299, 307-11, 315-375 342-7, 364, 392, 397-9, 404, 480-1, 495, 500-3, 505-8, 533, 562-3, 573-4, 579-80, 593, 620, 642, 669-70, 687, 694-708, 757> 797) 770, 786 Seal of prophets 307, 312, 371, 633-4, 690 secrets and secrecy 18 -- 19, 27, INDEX R-~S 32, 39, 58, 70-I, 102, 105-6, 110, 116, 119, I2I, 124, 127, 136, 140, 159, 165, 168, 177, 182, 184, 195, 197, 207, 218, 230-2, 259, 262, 270-1, 279, 288, 301-3, 311, 314, 337s 342, 348, 363-6, 368-9, 380-4, 402, 412, 414, 431, 433, 475» 494, 507, 525-30, 541, 557-8, 569-70, 573-4, 583, 587, 590, 610, 625, 635, 638, 650, 657, 663, 684, 692-3, 7159 72475» 445 777) 799 self, true 66, 109, 115, 117, 153, 185 -- 8, 221, 382, 393, 468, §O1, 531-2, 537) 5497-3, 551, 565, 574, 577) 580, 615, 689, 783-4 Serrano, Miguel go, 506, 523, 534s 545, 554, 579-81, 616, 619, 621, 659, 670, 714, 721, 781 servator mundi 126, 132-4, 140, 144, 195-6, 550-2, 557-8 Seven sermons to the dead 158 -- 9, 165, 567-8, 579» 5745 shadow 18, 119, 136, 157, 170, 224, 257, 306, 309, 620, shamans 23, 229, 235, 242, 395, 473, 482, 582, 630, 638 Stbylline oracles 407, 778 Sc Sicily 50, 197, 203-4, 577, 612-14 sickness 118-19, 124, 127, 131, 225, 249, 297, 395, 339- 40, 347-8, 353, 382, 408, 420, 474, 476, 546, 548, 551, §74, 660, 710-11, 714, 718, 779, 781, 794 silence 12-14, 25, 31-2, 36, 41, 47, 55-6, 67, 84-5, 100, 109, III, 115, 122, 148, 152, 167, 173-6, 181, 188, 232, 237-8, 245, 248, 256, 260, 267, 277, 285, 302, 3345 340, 343-6, 363, 367-9, 377) 424, 430-1, 474) 485, 582, 617-18, 632-3, 639, 762, 781, 795 Simon Magus 523, 560, 562, singleness 383, 537, 744 six hundred years 403-5, 440, sleep 47, 49, 108, 125, 134, 140, 231, 237, 298, 304-5, 344, 354, 378, 413-14, 430, 439, 441, 486-7, 628, 679, 686, 718-19, 783 Socrates 202, 425, 476, 487-8, 792-6 sohbet 381, 742 Sophia 278-9, 301, 391, 663, 683, 738, 764 soul 51, 66, 114-19, 122, 128, 172, 277-80, 304, 314, 334-5» 338, 365, 380, 391-2, 395, 408, 443, 476, 486-7, 503, 540, 545, 548, 581, 604, 661, 663, 686, 691-3, 705, 708, 735; 766-8, 786, 794 Spielrein, Sabina 589~-90 spirit of the depths and spirit of this time 58-9, 66-7, 72, 79-80, 84, 161, 165-9, 175-6, 178, 188, 202, 252, 289, 292, 302, 316-17, 321, 335, 343, 347) 369, 373» 390-1, 474, 492, 497, 501-2, 507-8, 515, 522, 525, 569, 572, 574-5; 582, 589, 611, 625-6, 667, 675-7, 684, 694, 728, 792 Spitteler, Carl 665, 692 Steiner, Rudolf 478, 483, 696 stillness 55, 100, 188, 190, 237, 429-31, 781, 795 stone 38, 46, 81-2, 99-101, 103-4, 126, 143, 200, 206-8, 213, 216, 283, 322, 517, 598, 629, 637, 665, stripping, inner 44, 62, I0g -- IIO, 125, 241, 329, 426, 444-5, 692, 795, 799 suffering 26-7, 29-30, 60, 71, 100, 106, 108-9, 118, 121, 144, 191, 231-2, 237, 266, 281, 297, 303, 319, 328-9, 337-43 349, 354-5, 406, PART SEVEN 414, 475, 494, 535-6, 619, 655, 708-1, 715, 719, 778-9 Sufis and Sufism 8, 33, 137, 139, 230, 246-7, 310, 364-7, 372, 379, 381, 388, 391, 393» 415» 443, 553-4) 573, 586-7, 640-1, 661, 688, 723-5, 731-3, 742-3, 749-50, 761-2, 796, 798-9 Suhrawardi, Shihab al -- Din Yahya 367-74, 393» 415; 725-34) 745, 762, 766 sun 437-9, IOI, 125, 130, 137-8, 275» 393» 487, 529, 554; 637, 659-60, 678, 726 superiors 369, 728 surrender, mystical 110, 120, 310, 532 Swedenborg, Emanuel 670 symbol 115, 182, 193, 196-8, 538-42, 554, 567, 570, 665, 733-4 sympatheta 330, 704 synchronicity 154, 290, 330-1, 397» 492-3; 608, 669-70, 703-5, 736 syncretism 199, 603-4, 690 Syria 137, 634 T Tartarus 598 teacher, inner 148-57, 164-77, INDEX S-U 186-7, 357, 364-8, 372, 385, 474) 560-3, 714, 725) 7390-2, 74.4~6 technology 40, 69-70, 180, 218-21, 228-9, 338-9, 432, 439, 481, 506 Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre telé ton aiénén 777 Tertullian 528, 633 Theosophists 269, 272, 656, 685, 696 therapeta 28, 310, 476 therapy 27-30, 118-23, 222, 310, 380, 397, 534, 544, 563, 596, 737, 744, 770-1 thought and thinking 10, 43-4, 49-50, 54-6, 79, 82, 89, 100, 116, 122, 135, 156-7, 173) 180, 183, 299, 324) 386, 394, 431, 490-1, 562-3, 567, 609, 628, 682, 697, 759 Tibetan traditions 229, 392, 405, 764 "Traditionalists" 245, 390-2, 479, 483-4, 616, 730-4, 754-63, 765-7 transcendence 308, 346, 415, 467-8, 542, 557 687, 713) 756-60, 783 transcendent function 691-2 translation and mistranslation 41, 83-5, 157, 188, 192, 259-60, 318-22, 326-35, g 368, 374, 516-18, 591-3, 637, 650-1, 687, 694-8, 707-8, 728, 732-4, 738- 9, 788 treasure 121, 132, 185, 262, 276, 405, 408, 585, 611 trickery 18-20, 30, 36, 41, 43, 55» 58, 77, 108, 139, 165, 180, 215, 238, 276, 289, 296, 310, 319-20, 337, 368, 395, 432, 444, 750, 763, 767, 781, 787, 790 Q-II, 30-7, 45, 62, 108-9, 121, 155, 165, 179, 181, 267-9, 273, 283, 301, 323-7, 369, 376, 384, 399-400, 466, 484, 494, 540-2, 545-6, 552, 623, 650, 657-9, 666, 734) 744, 759) 7737-4 Tunisia 32, 313, 333 Turfan 307, 313, 691 truth U ummah 365, 724 underworld 43, 53-64, 67, 72, 76, 79, 85-6, IOI, 104, 108, 110, 148, 156, 165, 194, 198, 204-5, 218, 269-70, 276-7, 291, 294, 298, 304, 318-19, 328, 438, 470, 490, 492-3, 497-9» 512, 515, 522, 528-9, 541, 567, 590, 595; 603, 614, 630-1, 662, 674-5, 682, 783, 788 UNESCO 702 unexpected, the 14, 27, 61, 98, 142-4, 163, 166, 183, 189, 284, 288, 300-1, 340, 349s 379 543» 557» 575» 581 -- 2, 632, 666, 682, 688, 710-11, 739, 764, 787 United Nations 178 United States: see America unspeakable, the 346-7, 489, 684, 713-14 Upanishads 129, 542 Urerfabrung: see primordial experience urgency 10, 21, 126-7, 132, 137) 165, 190, 194, 220, 264, 295, 317, 364, 424, 547-8, 747 Urizen 676-9, 711 Uroffenbarung: see primordial revelation V van der Post, Laurens 771, 773 Velia 46, 52-8, 213-16, 234-5, 485, 489-92 ventriloquism 150, 562, 710 vision and visions 44-7, 79, 81-2, 115-16, 146-7, 182, 194, 198, 236, 240, 265, 286, 289-91, 324, 344, 348-51, 373-4, 380, 385, PART SEVEN 403-4, 407, 411, 418-29, 443, 471, 540, 559-60, 589-90, 592, 594, 605-7, 632, 636, 643, 654, 659, 661, 667, 669-70, 678, 680-1, 685, 712-13, 715- 16, 732, 738, 741, 744, 746-7, 753-4, 768, 776, 7791 785-925 795-6 volcanic craters and lava 82-3, 88, 197-8, 204-5, 270-1, 276, 294, 321-2, 326-30, 374, 516-19, 584, 603, 613-15, 697; 702, 782 von Franz, Marie-Louise 418-25, 469, 475» 597, 544, 572, 591, 599-600, 627-9, 644, 646, 648-9, 658, 660-1, 700, 721, 776, 784-8 von Hartmann, Eduard 560 von Schubert, Gotthilf Heinrich 670 W Wagner, Richard 624-5, 767 Wagner, Suzanne 420-1, 784 Waite, Arthur Edward 693 war 181, 202, 225, 286-90, 367, 404-5, 411-13, 415, 505-6, 624-5, 667-70, 680, 742, 782, 791-2 warnings 19, 24, 55-6, 73, 84, 108, III -- 13, 119-20, INDEX U~Z 129-30, 142, 172, 174, 195, 219-21, 248, 251, 259-61, 265-6, 288, 338-40, 388-9, 424, 466, 472, 480, 495, 511, 516, 581-2, 650-1, 681, 691, 735» 749-52, 762-3, 766, 775» 789 Watts, Alan 771 Wechsler, Rabbi Hile 644, 672-3 White, Victor 528, 656, 686, 730-7, 774 whole, the 132, 408-9, 550, Wickes, Frances 621~2 wildness 77, 120, 156, 213-15, 247, 298, 326, 332-3, 353; 424, 598, 622, 637-8, 680, 788 Wilhelm, Richard 129, 548, will, divine 401-2, 598, 689 Wolff, Toni 518 -- 19, 529 Woolf, Virginia 519 world ages 347-50, 389, 406, 437-40, 714-15, 777-8 Y Yeats, W.B. 681 Z Zarathustra 303, 307, 309-10, GC, 685, 689-90, 706 Zeller, Max 776 Zen Buddhism 229, 392, 764 Zeno 485, 489 Zeus 605, 638, 647 Zoroastrianism (see also Zarathustra) 283, 294, 306, 665-6, 674-5, 751-2 Zosimus of Panopolis 589-91, 601, 605-6, 799 And just as I'm dark, and also will be towards those to whom I have no intention of revealing myself, so the whole of this book will remain incomprehensible; and not much will happen without anyone receiving its gifts OTHER BOOKS BY PETER KINGSLEY ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY, MYSTERY AND MAGIC "A masterpiece, gripping, urgent and important: a unique pioneering work." European Review of History "Every scholar dreams of writing a truly original book, but in reality hardly anyone ever does. A truly original book, one that can transform a whole discipline, appears at the most once in a generation. In the field of ancient philosophy, Peter Kingsley's Ancient Philosophy, Mystery and Magic is such a book." Prof. Anthony Long, author of Greek Models of Mind and Self and editor of The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy IN THE DARK PLACES OF WISDOM "This remarkable book speaks with equal power to the scholar and the seeker alike. To absorb what it says is to encounter a completely new vision of the ancient world that lies at the root of our own civilization. Right there, at our own feet, lies a forgotten tradition that has the power to transform all our views about our culture and our life." Jacob Needleman, author of Lost Christianity, The Heart of Philosophy and I am not I "Quite simply a masterpiece: a work of immaculate, luminous scholarship which recovers for Western civilization the treasures of wisdom discarded by Plato over 2000 years ago. No-one could fail to respond to this story or be moved by the poetic prose which takes us 'as far as longing can reach' and opens a door into depths which have never been recognized, let alone explored by our culture." Anne Baring, author of The Dream of the Cosmos and co-author of Zhe Myth of the Goddess REALITY "Reality contains the purest and most powerful writing I have ever read." Michael Baigent, author of Ancient Traces and The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail "Peter Kingsley is a successor to Carl Jung and Joseph Campbell. He is a transformative and life-changing force in our world. Never have we needed such a message as now." Larry Dossey, M.D., author of Reinventing Medicine and Healing Words "Dr. Kingsley's remarkable new book, Rea/ity, is extraordinarily valuable. It would be difficult not to conclude that, through his research into our past, he has found the key to the modern world impasse." Robert Johnson, author of He, She, Inner Work, and Balancing Heaven and Earth A STORY WAITING TO PIERCE YOU "This is the real thing. In each paragraph of the book, the Spirit is there. This is what the native people of the Americas have been trying to say, but were never permitted to. This song is the song of wisdom that we native people have not been allowed to sing." Joseph Rael (Beautiful Painted Arrow), from the Foreword "The rich and dense scholarship in this book is admirable, nay incredible, with worldwide scope. Scholarly discussion depends on evidence -- of which A Story Waiting to Pierce You offers the most surprising riches combined with overwhelming expertise." Prof. Walter Burkert, author of Greek Religion and Babylon, Memphis, Persepolis "In this profoundly erudite and eloquent book is a startling ancient secret that will forever alter the way we think about the origins of western civilization." Pir Zia Inayat Khan, Sufi sheikh and spiritual leader of the Inayati Order To learn more about Peter Kingsley's work visit www. peterkingsley.org